RESEARCH ARTICLE                            A Pore-Scale Investigation of Mineral Precipitation
10.1029/2020WR028483
                                            Driven Diffusivity Change at the Column-Scale
Key Points:
                                            H. Deng1     , C. Tournassat1,2,3   , S. Molins1    , F. Claret2   , and C. I. Steefel1
• P ore-scale reactive transport
   modeling of diffusion controlled         Energy Geosciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA, USA, 2BRGM, Orléans, France,
                                            1
   mineral precipitation                    3
                                            Institut des Sciences de la Terre d’Orléans, Université d’Orléans—CNRS/INSU—BRGM, Orléans, France
• Examined the evolution of pore
   structures and averaged bulk
   properties
• Developed modified porosity-             Abstract Mineral precipitation affects the pore structure and thus transport properties of porous
   diffusivity relationship that accounts   media. In this study, we investigated the pore-scale dynamics of precipitation in diffusion controlled
   for pore-scale mineral precipitation
   dynamics
                                            systems and the resulting impacts on the effective diffusivity, using a micro-continuum reactive transport
                                            model. Forty two-dimensional pore structures representing both idealized and realistic geometries were
                                            simulated with consideration of different precipitation scenarios and rates. A homogeneous nucleation
Supporting Information:
                                            scenario reproduced patterns observed in previous experimental study showing mixing-induced
Supporting Information may be found
in the online version of this article.      precipitation, and a surface growth scenario captured the pattern for mineral precipitation on a substrate
                                            with the same or similar mineral structures. In all cases, local precipitation resulted in the reduction in
Correspondence to:
                                            the average porosity of the domain (Φ) until the cessation of diffusive transport and the termination of
H. Deng,                                    precipitation. The minimum porosity reached was referred to as the critical porosity (Φc). The effective
hangdeng@lbl.gov                            diffusivity (Deff ) decreased with Φ and dropped sharply to effectively zero, that is, the critical effective
                                            diffusivity (Deffc), as Φc was reached. These pore-scale dynamics can be captured by a revised Φ  Deff
Citation:                                   relationship that explicitly considers the critical porosity and the corresponding effective diffusivity, and
Deng, H., Tournassat, C., Molins, S.,       the pre-exponential coefficient and the exponent of the relationship varied with initial pore structure and
Claret, F., & Steefel, C. I. (2021). A      the precipitation kinetics. Overall, the homogeneous nucleation scenario results in systematically larger
pore-scale investigation of mineral
precipitation driven diffusivity change     Φc and coefficients that give rise to a sharper decrease in diffusivity as Φc is approached, compared to the
at the column-scale. Water Resources        surface growth scenario. The revised relationship was also implemented at continuum scale and used to
Research, 57, e2020WR028483. https://       examine column scale diffusivity change and reactions.
doi.org/10.1029/2020WR028483

Received 27 JUL 2020
                                            Plain Language Summary Mineral precipitation alters the internal structures of geo-
Accepted 18 APR 2021                        materials, and thus affects how fluid and solutes migrate in these porous media. Typically, this alteration
                                            has been modeled by assuming that the changes in transport properties are proportional to the amount
                                            of mineral precipitation, following a simple power law function. However, previous experimental studies
                                            have pointed out that in addition to the amount of mineral precipitation, how the structures of porous
                                            media are altered by the mineral precipitates can be important as well. In our study, we used numerical
                                            modeling that resolves the geometry of porous media explicitly to investigate how the structures evolve as
                                            a result of mineral precipitation. In these simulations, we consider initial geometry of different complexity
                                            and a range of precipitation rates that have been reported in previous studies. All the simulations showed
                                            that a small amount of precipitation can result in plugging of the porous media, by clogging a small
                                            portion of the transport pathways. Based on the simulation results, we demonstrated that the simple
                                            power law function can be modified to account for these structural changes. We have also implemented
                                            this modified power law relationship to simulate a column experiment published previously and showed
                                            good agreements.


                                            1. Introduction
                                            Mineral dissolution and precipitation can change the structures of fractured porous media, and thus control
                                            their mechanical and hydrodynamic properties. Mineral precipitation is widely observed and occurs when
© 2021. The Authors.                        the fluid is over-saturated with respect to one or multiple mineral phases. Some conditions that can be en-
This is an open access article under
the terms of the Creative Commons           countered in natural and engineered systems and lead to mineral precipitation include (i) solubility change,
Attribution-NonCommercial License,          for example, due to the presence of temperature gradients (Griffiths et al., 2016; Steefel & Lasaga, 1994),
which permits use, distribution and         (ii) mixing of fluids (Emmanuel & Berkowitz, 2005; Tartakovsky et al., 2008), and (iii) mineral dissolution
reproduction in any medium, provided
the original work is properly cited and     that increases the concentration of key chemical species (Garcia-Rios et al., 2015; Li et al., 2017; Seigneur
is not used for commercial purposes.        et al., 2019; Steefel & Lichtner, 1994; Xie et al., 2015). Understanding and predicting the evolution of Earth’s


DENG ET AL.                                                                                                                                          1 of 16
                  Water Resources Research                                                     10.1029/2020WR028483



              systems resulting from mineral precipitation are important. For instance, mineralization of CO2 injected
              into the underground as part of geologic carbon storage is an important permanent trapping mechanism
              (Matter et al., 2016), and mineral precipitation can affect the efficiency of hydraulic fracturing and the per-
              formance of other subsurface energy applications (Vankeuren et al., 2017). In addition, salt precipitation
              alters the hydraulic properties of soils (Nachshon et al., 2011) and the porosity in coastal environments,
              especially in the saltwater-freshwater mixing zones (Singurindy et al., 2004). Mineral precipitation is one
              mechanism used to scavenge contaminants in aquifers (Wright et al., 2011), a by-product of remediation
              technologies such as in situ chemical oxidation (Chen and Park, 2017), and can reduce the efficiency of
              membranes used for water desalination (Rahardianto et al., 2008). Therefore, evaluating and predicting
              mineral precipitation and its impacts on porous media are needed for improving management practices of
              soils and groundwater resources.

              In continuum scale modeling (Lichtner, 1996; Steefel & Lichtner, 1994; 1998; Steefel et al., 2005; Steefel,
              Appelo, et al., 2015), the changes in flow and transport properties resulting from mineral precipitation, and
              mineral reactions in general, are typically described by power law functions of porosity (ϕ). Commonly used
              functional relations include the Kozeny-Carman relationship between porosity and permeability and Ar-
              chie’s law that relates effective diffusivity to porosity. These relationships are easy to implement and allow
              some considerations of system specificity such as textural heterogeneity through the empirical coefficients
              (Cai et al., 2017; Luquot & Gouze, 2009; Menke et al., 2017; Peng et al., 2012; Smith et al., 2013; Steinwinder
              & Beckingham, 2019).

              However, adjusting the parameters alone in some cases fails to produce flow and transport properties that
              are directly measured or inferred from observations. In flow-through experiments in carbonate rocks with
              induced precipitation (Luquot & Gouze, 2009), it is observed that porosity-permeability relationship shifted
              away from a power law relationship as precipitation progresses. Navarre-Sitchler et al. (2009) performed dif-
              fusion experiments on weathered basalt samples and the corresponding parent materials and showed that
              the effective diffusivity (Deff ) evaluated using micro-x-ray fluorescence spectroscopy cannot be fitted with a
              simple form of Archie’s law given by Deff  Dm a m, where Dm is the molecular diffusion coefficient and a
              and m are the empirical coefficients. In Chagneau et al. (2015), a set of column experiments were carried
              out to assess the changes in the effective diffusivity of the system as a result of mineral precipitation. In the
              study of Chagneau et al. (2015), a one-dimensional continuum reactive transport model using Archie’s law
              either over-estimated the amount of precipitation or over-estimated the tracer transport.

              These studies highlighted the need of further development of constitutive relations or other means to ac-
              count for pore-scale dynamics that are not captured by bulk averaged parameters used in continuum scale
              modeling. For this purpose, pore-scale experiments and modeling have been used to investigate microscopic
              scale dynamics that arise from geometric and mineralogical heterogeneity and that can propagate to larg-
              er scale processes (Cil et al., 2017; Deng et al., 2018; Chen et al., 2014; Molins et al., 2020; Zhang, Kang,
              et al., 2010). For system evolution driven by mineral precipitation, the complexity of pore-scale dynamics
              is compounded by the processes of nucleation and crystal growth. It was shown that the morphology and
              texture of the precipitates depend on the substrates (Noiriel et al., 2016), supersaturation (Kim et al., 2020;
              Rajyaguru et al., 2019; Zhang, Dehoff, et al., 2010), and local hydrodynamics (Poonoosamy et al., 2019).
              Parallel pore-scale modeling studies were used to simulate precipitation patterns (Yoon et al., 2012), and
              their dependence on fluid saturation (Prasianakis et al., 2017). Pore-scale models were also used to examine
              system evolution and their dependence on different nucleation mechanisms, for example, epitaxial crystal
              growth versus crystal growth along the direction of maximum concentration gradient or probabilistic nu-
              cleation versus deterministic nucleation (Fazeli et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2014).

              These studies with well controlled and characterized experiments and high-fidelity modeling have pro-
              vided valuable data and important mechanistic understanding of precipitation-driven pore-scale dynam-
              ics. While a few studies have examined permeability evolution following precipitation and its relationship
              with respect to porosity change (Fazeli et al., 2020; Noiriel et al., 2016), how pore-scale dynamics translate
              into continuum scale transport properties remains an open question. In our study, we aim to use carefully
              designed pore-scale reactive transport simulations to address this gap. The complexity and uncertainties
              of precipitation kinetics were considered by including different precipitation scenarios and rates. In the
              following sections, we first present the model and simulation approach and then follow this with pore-scale


DENG ET AL.                                                                                                            2 of 16
                                         Water Resources Research                                                  10.1029/2020WR028483



                                                                       simulation results and discussions of the revised mathematical relation
                                                                       that integrates the pore-scale dynamics into column/continuum scale
                                                                       simulations.


                                                                       2. Methods
                                                                         The approach taken in this work is the simulation of diffusion-reaction
                                                                         processes in 2D domains derived from openly available digital rock data.
                                                                         The simulations were performed systematically under different model
                                                                         assumptions and over a range of parameters. The simulations used the
                                                                         solution chemistry and major physical bulk properties of the experi-
                                                                         mental work of Chagneau et al. (2015), in which celestite precipitation
Figure 1. Illustration of the 2D domains of (a) the Finney pack geometry
and (b) the quartz sand pack geometry, and of the fluid chemistry        was induced in the quartz sand packed column by the mixing of a Sr-
boundary conditions used in the simulations.                             rich fluid and a sulfate-rich fluid introduced via diffusion from the two
                                                                         ends, respectively. This allowed us to leverage the experimental data for
                                                                         comparison and discussion. The precipitation reaction writes as follows.
                                        All aqueous reactions and the corresponding equilibrium constants are summarized in the supporting
                                        information.

                                    Sr 2   SO42   SrSO 4  s  .
                                    (1)



                                    2.1. Pore Geometry

                                    Two pore geometries were considered, using data archived at the digital rock portal (https://www.digital-
                                    rocksportal.org/). One data set represents an idealized geometry from a random packing of hard spheres
                                    with uniform radii (Finney, 2016). A three-dimensional (3D) volume image was generated using the re-
                                    ported coordinates of the sphere centers, using a radius of 150 µm and a voxel size of 5 µm. The voxel size
                                    was representative of the resolution of micro-tomography images, and the diameter was comparable to the
                                    grain size used in the experiments of Chagneau et al. (2015). The other data set included grayscale synchro-
                                    tron x-ray computed tomography images of a column that was packed with quartz sands of grain sizes of
                                    420–600 µm (Molnar, 2016). The images had a resolution of 9.87 µm and were rescaled to a resolution of
                                    5 µm such that the grain sizes were comparable with the Finney pack geometries. For the simulations, the
                                    CT images from Molnar (2016) were segmented in MATLAB using Otsu’s method (Otsu, 1979) to generate
                                    a binary volume image. The average porosity of the middle section of the Finney pack was 48%, whereas
                                    the average porosity of the quartz pack was 33%. These values are on the higher and lower end of the values
                                    reported for the experimental columns (42%  9%), respectively.

                                    For our simulations, twenty two-dimensional (2D) domains were randomly selected from each 3D volume,
                                    as illustrated in Figure 1. The domain size was 1 by 1 mm (200 by 200 grid cells) for the Finney pack geom-
                                    etries (numbered as FGeo1-20) and was 1 by 1.75 mm (200 by 350 grid cells) for the quartz pack geometries
                                    (numbered as QGeo1-20). The width was larger for the quartz pack geometries to ensure initial connected-
                                    ness of the domain.


                                    2.2. Reactive Transport Model for Precipitation Simulations

                                    In our study, the code CrunchTope (Steefel, Appelo, et al., 2015) was used for all the reactive transport simu-
                                    lations. For pore-scale simulations, modifications were made to implement the micro-continuum approach:
                                    the pore geometry was explicitly represented, whereas porosity was used to keep track of partial volume
                                    in individual grid cells due to precipitation. As the system considered was diffusion controlled, the main
                                    governing equation written with respect to the total concentration of a chemical component Ψi is given as
                                    follows:
                                     Ψi
                                    (2)      DΨi   i Ri ,
                                     t


DENG ET AL.                                                                                                                                3 of 16
                  Water Resources Research                                                      10.1029/2020WR028483



              where the local porosity (ϕ) is 1.0 in the pore space, 0.0 inside the mineral grains and is a fractional value
              as precipitation progresses and occupies part of the grid cell. D is the diffusion coefficient, which is equal
              to the molecular diffusion coefficient in the pore space, and is Dm in grid cells occupied by the precipitates
              to account for the tortuosity caused by the presence of the solid phase. Two additional non-linear tortuosity
              models ( D  Dm n0 , n0  2 or 3) were also tested for a subset of the simulation conditions to examine the
              impacts of this assumption. For simplicity, we assumed that the molecular diffusion for all aqueous species
              is the same, with Dm = 2.24 × 10−9 m2/s following that of the tracer in Chagneau et al. (2015). The total
              concentration is the sum of the concentration of the primary species and those of other species that can
              be expressed in terms of the primary species based on mass action laws. The concentrations of all primary
              species were calculated by solving the mass balance equation (Equation 2). Spatial discretization for numer-
              ically solving Equation 2 followed the image resolution.

              The reaction term (last term on the right hand side) accounts for the concentration change caused by min-
              eral reactions, with ϑi being the stoichiometric coefficient and one for celestite. Two precipitation conceptu-
              alizations were considered to bracket different reaction mechanisms. In one scenario, homogeneous nucle-
              ation was enabled in the pore space and provided the initial surface area for subsequent crystal growth. This
              is referred to as the homogeneous nucleation (HN) scenario. In the other scenario, referred to as the surface
              growth (SG) scenario, homogeneous nucleation in the pore space was not enabled. This is also equivalent of
              assuming that heterogeneous nucleation is fast and crystal growth picks up immediately.

                    Ri,nuc  Ri,tst , for HN
              Ri  
              (3)                             .
                      R ,               for SG
                     i,tst

              Crystal growth rate was calculated from the transition state theory rate law (Ri,tst [mol / m 3s]) and is positive
              for the precipitation reaction.
                                                                m2
                                                   IAP  1 
                                                           m
                                 nj     Ea  
              R
              (4)    Ak rxn  a j exp     1                .
                                        RT            
               i ,tst
                                                    Ksp                                 

                       
              where A m / m2    3
                                     is the bulk surface area of the mineral, k  mol / m s is the kinetic factor, a is the
                                                                                 rxn
                                                                                            2
                                                                                                                         j

              activity of any catalytic and inhibitory species, and nj is the corresponding reaction order. The Arrhenius
                                                                                                                     
              term accounts for the temperature (T [ K ]) effect, where Ea  J / mol  is the activation energy, and R J/mol K 
              is the ideal gas constant. The thermodynamic driving force is measured by the saturation index, which is
              the ratio of ionic activity product (IAP) to solubility (Ksp), and m1 and m2 are constants dependent on the
              reaction mechanisms.

              Homogeneous nucleation rate ( Ri,nuc [mol / m 3s] ) was described by the classical nucleation theory and was
              implemented in CrunchTope as follows (Li et al., 2017):

                                                            
                                                            
                                                 2 3        
                                           16  v  
              Ri ,nuc A0 J 0 exp  
              
              (5)                                           
                                                          2 
                                            
                                    3 3   IAP      
                                    3k BT  ln  K   
                                             sp   

              where A0 is unity (m 2 / m 3) and J0 is the kinetic factor with a value of 1.0 × 10−8 mol/m2s for celestite, which
              is within the range inferred from the experimental study of Poonoosamy et al. (2019). v is the molecular
              volume (8.21 × 10−29 m3 for celestite), α is the effective interfacial tension (0.092 J/m2 for celestite, Nielsen
              & Söhnel, 1971), and kB is the Boltzmann constant. It is assumed that the nuclei formed via homogeneous
              nucleation stay in the same grid cell, where the crystal growth continues.

              For the homogeneous nucleation scenario, at a given time (t), the surface area used in Equation 4 was cal-
              culated as


DENG ET AL.                                                                                                              4 of 16
                                            Water Resources Research                                                            10.1029/2020WR028483



Table 1
The Kinetic Data and Surface Area Setup for Different Precipitation Scenarios Simulated in This Study
Scenario                                       Nucleation                  Crystal growth kinetic data                      Surface area         Reference
                                                                                                                                             2
Homogeneous nucleation                       0.092 J / m 2 *                     krxn  kMarty               Specific surface area 0.44 m /g    ssa0.44

                                       J
                                        0 1.0  10 8 mol / m 2s**           m1 0.5,
                                                                                     m2 2

                                                                               log kMarty  7.23 ***

                                              0.092 J / m 2                    krxn  kusgs a 0.109          Specific surface area 0.44 m2/g   ssa0.44_
                                                                                                H 
                                                                                                                                                     usgs
                                        J 1.0  10 8 mol / m 2s                  m
                                                                                   1 m
                                                                                       2 1
                                         0

                                                                               log kusgs  5.66 ****

                                              0.092 J / m 2                      krxn  kMarty                Specific surface area 44 m2/g      ssa44


                                        J
                                         0 1.0  10 8 mol / m 2s            m1 0.5,
                                                                                     m2 2

                                                                                log kMarty  7.23

Surface growth                                    N/A                              krxn  kMarty                    Porosity gradient area         pga

                                                                               m1 2,
                                                                                   m2 0.5

                                                                                log kMarty  7.23

                                                  N/A                            krxn  kusgs a 0.109               Porosity gradient area       pga_usgs
                                                                                                H 


                                                                                   m
                                                                                   1 m
                                                                                       2 1

                                                                                 log kusgs  5.66

The data are from *Nielsen & Söhnel (1971), **Poonoosamy et al. (2019), ***Marty et al. (2015), and **** Palandri (2004).



                                                                                                          t
                                       A  MW  ssa   Ri ,
                                       (6)
                                                                                                          0


                                       where MW  g / mol is the molecular weight and ssa is the specific surface area (m2/g).

                                       For the surface growth scenario, the surface area used in Equation 4 was the geometric surface area of the
                                       solid phase and was calculated based on the pore geometry as the gradient of the local porosity using the
                                       micro-continuum formulation derived from the volume averaging theorem (Soulaine et al., 2017 and ref-
                                       erences therein):

                                       A   .
                                       (7)

                                       In order to account for uncertainties introduced by the kinetic data, two sets of kinetic coefficients and
                                       two specific surface areas were examined in the simulations. One kinetic formulation followed Paland-
                                       ri (2004) and included a non-linear dependence on pH. The other kinetic formulation used was from Marty
                                       et al. (2015) and was independent of any other species. The specific surface area of celestite varies substan-
                                       tially, as reported in Chagneau et al. (2015). Accordingly, two values, 0.44 and 44 m2/g, were chosen as the
                                       bounding cases. Overall, higher specific surface area and the kinetic coefficient from Marty et al. (2015)
                                       would result in higher reaction rate. The parameters and kinetic scenarios are summarized in Table 1.

                                       Mineral precipitation was used to update local porosity:

                                        t  dt  t  RiVm dt,
                                       (8)

                                       where Vm is the molar volume of celestite and dt is the time step.


DENG ET AL.                                                                                                                                         5 of 16
                  Water Resources Research                                                      10.1029/2020WR028483



              The precipitation simulations used boundary conditions similar to the experiment. The two ends of the
              computational domain were assigned a Dirichlet boundary condition, in contact with a solution of 0.5 M
              SrCl2 and a Na2SO4 solution of 0.5 M, respectively (Figure 1). The other two sides were assigned no flux
              boundary conditions.


              2.3. Numerical Tracer Experiments

              During the precipitation simulations, pore structures were recorded at multiple time points. Numerical trac-
              er experiments were performed to evaluate the corresponding effective diffusivity, similar in concept and
              execution to those considered by Navarre-Sitchler et al. (2009) and Steefel, Beckingham, & Landrot (2015).
              The governing equation of the numerical tracer experiments was similar to the precipitation simulations
              but without the reaction term.

              Ctracer
              (9)          DCtracer  .
                t

              In the tracer simulations, the Dirichlet boundary on the left was considered as the inlet and was exposed
              to a solution with a non-reactive tracer of 1 M. The pairing boundary, that is, the outlet, had a zero-gradi-
              ent boundary condition and is where the tracer break-through curve (Ctracer  t  |x  L ) was monitored. Other
              boundary conditions, spatial discretization, and diffusion coefficients were set up in the same way as the
              precipitation simulations.

              The effective diffusivity ( Deff ) is the bulk transport property of the entire computational domain and is
              evaluated by fitting the tracer break-through curve from the numerical tracer experiments using the one-di-
              mensional (1D) diffusion equation.

              Ctracer         2Ctracer
              (10)     Deff            .
                t               x 2

              Its relation with respect to the domain porosity (Φ), which is the average of the local porosity in all grid cells
              in the domain (Φ   x  y  x, y ), was analyzed. In the following sections, porosity refers to the domain
              porosity unless specified otherwise.

              Numerical tracer experiments were performed for all Finney pack geometries and a subset of four quartz
              sand pack geometries.


              3. Simulation Results
              3.1. Pore Geometry Evolution and Porosity Reduction

              In the homogeneous nucleation scenario, a precipitation band formed in the pore space (Figure 2a–2c).
              This type of pattern was observed in the microfluidic experiments by Zhang, Dehoff, et al. (2010), in which
              calcium-carbonate precipitation was induced by the mixing of the calcium-rich and carbonate-rich fluids
              in the analog porous media, and the precipitation band tracked the mixing line of the two fluids. Their ex-
              perimental observation was also confirmed by the companion modeling work (Yoon et al., 2012), and the
              initial surface area was assumed to be provided by the top and bottom surfaces of the microfluidic cell. In
              our study, the initial surface area was created by the homogeneous nucleation in the fluid that was locally
              supersaturated.

              In contrast, under the surface growth scenario, the precipitates coated the mineral grains, and the precipita-
              tion pattern was thus largely influenced by the initial pore structure (Figures 2d and 2e). This precipitation
              pattern was consistent with the scenario when the substrate had a similar crystal structure to the precipitat-
              ing mineral. Similar patterns have been observed in the experimental study of Noiriel et al. (2012) when the
              injected fluid over-saturated with respect to calcium carbonate interacted with the calcite spar substrate. In
              these cases, heterogeneous nucleation, which was not considered in our model, is fast, and the following
              crystal growth is the dominant process.


DENG ET AL.                                                                                                             6 of 16
                                             Water Resources Research                                                         10.1029/2020WR028483




Figure 2. Snapshots of pore geometry evolution for a Finney pack geometry (a)–(e) and a quartz sand pack geometry (f)–(j) for different precipitation setups:
(a) (f)—ssa0.44, (b) (g)—ssa0.44_usgs, (c) (h)—ssa44, (d) (i)—pga, (e) (j)—pga_usgs. Note that due to the difference in reaction rate and geometry, each case
reached the clogging point at different time steps, and the snapshots shown are thus at different times.


                                        Across different precipitation model setups and initial pore geometries, the domain porosity (Φ) decreased
                                        as a result of precipitation and reached a non-zero constant value afterward (Figure 3), indicating that the
                                        precipitation reaction became inhibited. As the precipitates blocked the transport pathways, mixing of the
                                        two fluids was suppressed, and thus, the precipitation reaction was no longer sustained. Here, the average
                                        porosity within the 2D computational domain at the end of the precipitation reaction is referred to as the
                                        critical porosity (Φc).

                                        Under the surface growth scenario, domain porosity decreased continuously from the beginning of the
                                        simulation until the critical porosity was reached. In comparison, in the homogeneous nucleation scenario,
                                        the domain porosity remained unchanged initially as the nucleation dominated over the crystal growth
                                        pathway. The decrease in Φ became evident once enough surface area had been created by nucleation for
                                        the crystal growth to pick up. The critical porosity tended to be lower under the surface growth scenario.


DENG ET AL.                                                                                                                                            7 of 16
                  Water Resources Research                                                       10.1029/2020WR028483




              Figure 3. Domain porosity (Φ) evolution for (a) 20 Finney pack geometries (FGeo1-20) and (b) 20 quartz sand pack
              geometries (QGeo1-20) with different precipitation setups. Note that some cases had longer simulations as they
              required longer to reach the clogging time point than other cases.


              For instance, for the quartz pack geometries, surface growth simulations had critical porosity as low as 24%,
              whereas the critical porosity of homogeneous nucleation simulations was always above 31%. This is because
              in the surface growth scenario, precipitation occurred on the grain surfaces outside of the pore throats were
              less effective in clogging the transport pathway (Figures 2d, 2e, 2i and 2j).

              For the same precipitation conceptualization and geometry, a lower critical porosity was observed at a slow-
              er reaction rate. For example, in the Finney pack simulations, the critical porosity for the ssa0.44 (specific
              surface area = 0.44 m2/g) case was lower than the ssa44 (specific surface area = 44 m2/g) case by 3 percent-
              age points. This is a result of the interplay between precipitation and diffusion, which is typically measured
              by the Damköhler number (Da). At the lower precipitation rate (lower Da), in grid cells that are over-satu-
              rated, less chemicals (Sr2+ and SO42−) are removed from the solution by precipitation and more are trans-
              ported downgradient. As a result, more grid cells become oversaturated, and by the time when the transport


DENG ET AL.                                                                                                               8 of 16
                                              Water Resources Research                                                            10.1029/2020WR028483




Figure 4. Effective diffusivity in relation to the porosity from the tracer simulations and the fitting line using Equation 11 for the five precipitation kinetic
setups of all the Finney pack geometries (FGeo1-20). The goodness-of-fitting R2 parameter is 0.97 on average, and larger than 0.91 for all 100 cases except for
two.



                                         paths become clogged, more precipitation would have happened. As shown in Figure 2, the precipitation
                                         band formed in the homogeneous nucleation scenario was thicker at a slower reaction rate, and the growth
                                         of the grain surfaces was observable in a wider region in the surface growth cases.


                                         etries and between ∼1% and 20% for the Finney pack geometries (Figure 3). The reduction in porosity is
                                         The overall reduction in the domain porosity varied between less than 1%–12% for the quartz pack geom-

                                         positively correlated with the initial porosity in the Finney pack geometries; whereas there is no clear cor-
                                         relation between the porosity reduction and the initial porosity for the quartz pack geometries (Figure S1).
                                         This implies that for the idealized hard sphere packing of Finney geometries, initial porosity is a good
                                         indicator of the pore structure and connectivity. In contrast, for the quartz pack geometries, there is more
                                         spatial heterogeneity in the pore structure, and porosity does not accurately reflect the connectivity of the
                                         pore structures. For instance, it was reported that permeability of sandstones from different basins does not
                                         vary monotonically with porosity and samples with comparable porosity can have different permeability
                                         and thus connectivity (Zou et al., 2012).



                                         3.2. Effective Diffusivity Evolution

                                         The effective diffusivity decreased with the porosity (Figure 4). The initial effective diffusivity ranged be-
                                         tween 1.1e−9 and 1.6e−9 m2/s in the 20 Finney pack geometries given a molecular diffusion coefficient of
                                         2.24e−9 m2/s for the tracer. The relatively large initial effective diffusivity was indicative of the presence of
                                         open transport pathways. As the porosity approached the clogging value, the effective diffusivity decreased
                                         significantly. At the critical porosity, the effective diffusivity became effectively zero, as evidenced by the
                                         termination of the mixing and precipitation. This was also expected in our simulations, as precipitation
                                         was allowed to proceed until local porosity (ϕ) was effectively zero (a non-zero but negligible value was
                                         used for numerical reasons). Such clogging has also been observed experimentally. In the experiments of
                                         Zhang, Dehoff, et al. (2010), dissolution of the precipitated calcium carbonate was observed at the late stage,


DENG ET AL.                                                                                                                                                  9 of 16
                  Water Resources Research                                                           10.1029/2020WR028483




              Figure 5. (a) Pre-exponential coefficient and (b) exponent of Equation 11 for all Finney pack geometries (filled circle)
              and the subset of quartz sand pack geometries simulated (open square) for different precipitation kinetic setups.


              confirming negligible transport through the precipitates and thus the termination of mixing and further
              precipitation as observed in the simulations here.

              These trends are consistent with what was observed in Navarre-Sitchler et al. (2009). Therefore, we account-
              ed for the clogging effect of the precipitates on effective diffusivity by adopting the following mathematical
              formulation:

              Deff Deff c  aDm   c  ,
                                                                                        n
              (11)


              where a and n are empirical coefficients. Theoretically, the value of Deffc can be determined by running the
              numerical tracer experiment on the pore structure at the critical porosity. Here, because Dm  0 when
                0 in the pore space that is clogged by the precipitates, Deff c  0, as also confirmed by the numerical
              tracer experiments, which showed no break-through of the tracer after 10 million seconds. Therefore, a
              value of 1e−15 m2/s was assumed for Deffc across all geometries and precipitation scenarios. This value is on
              the same order of magnitude as the value used for unweathered basalt rocks in Navarre-Sitchler et al. (2009)
              and provides a reasonable estimate for low diffusivity systems that can be encountered. Using a value of
              0 or 1e−15 m2/s for Deffc did not affect the evaluation of the parameters a and n. Because each simulation
              evolves differently and it was impossible to predict the clogging time a priori and thus set the output time
              steps accordingly, data points are sparse in the region where the diffusivity drops dramatically within a
              small porosity change and a relatively short time period.

              For the Finney pack geometries (Figure 5), the pre-exponential coefficients (a) for the two surface growth
              cases (i.e., “pga” and “pga_usgs”) were 0.24  0.06 (mean  standard deviation) and 0.29  0.07, respectively,
              and were smaller than those for the three homogeneous nucleation cases (i.e., “ssa0.44”, “ssa0.44_usgs”, and
              “ssa44”), which were 0.46  0.06, 0.45  0.07, and 0.49  0.08, respectively. Under the same precipitation sce-
              nario, the reaction rate only had a minor impact on the pre-exponential coefficient. The exponent (n) in the
              surface growth scenario, which was 0.41  0.08 and 0.36  0.09 for the two cases, was slightly larger than in
              the homogeneous nucleation scenario. For the three homogeneous nucleation cases, n showed a larger var-
              iation across different geometries, with values of 0.26  0.09, 0.30  0.13, and 0.29  0.16. For FGeo8, simula-
              tions were performed with larger domain sizes for “ssa0.44_usgs” and “pga_usgs”. The simulations showed
              similar evolution in the pore structures. The pre-exponential coefficient and exponent values were within
              the ranges observed for different geometries. More information is provided in the supporting information.

              Diffusion simulations of the quartz pack geometries resulted in similar observations (Figure 5). The pre-ex-
              ponential coefficient was lower than that of the Finney pack geometries. It was 0.22  0.07, 0.3  0.09, 0.26
               0.08 for “ssa0.44”, “ssa0.44_usgs”, and “ssa44”, respectively, which was larger than the two surface growth


DENG ET AL.                                                                                                                   10 of 16
                  Water Resources Research                                                     10.1029/2020WR028483



              cases (0.11  0.1 and 0.14  0.1). The exponent values were 0.21  0.2, 0.38  0.22, 0.24  0.15 for the three
              homogeneous nucleation cases, and were comparable to the average values of the Finney pack geometries.
              The exponent for the two surface growth cases were on the higher end of the range observed for the Finney
              pack geometries, with values of 0.47  0.25 and 0.44  0.21.

              Everything else being equal, a smaller pre-exponential coefficient leads to a lower effective diffusivity. This
              is consistent with the observation that the pre-exponential coefficients of the quartz pack geometries, for
              which the initial diffusivity ranges between 3.2 and 7.2e−10 m2/s, are systematically lower than those of the
              Finney pack geometries, for which the initial diffusivities are 1.1–1.6e−9 m2/s. A weak positive correlation
              was observed between the pre-exponential coefficient and the initial diffusivity (supporting information).
              The exponent controls the shape of the curve described by Equation 11. A small exponent corresponds
              to a limited reduction in diffusivity at early stages of porosity reduction and a sharp decrease toward the
              critical porosity. For instance, in the homogeneous nucleation scenario (for which the exponent tends to be
              lower), the initial development of the precipitation bands did not necessarily translate to transport pathway
              clogging and thus reduction in the diffusivity. In contrast, in the surface growth scenario, precipitation re-
              sulted in grain dilation very early on, the pore throats and thus diffusivity decreased continuously from the
              beginning of the simulations, corresponding to higher exponents. The trajectory of the diffusivity evolution
              depends on not only the precipitation mechanism but also the pore structures. This is why large standard
              deviations in the exponent were observed among different geometries. However, no clear correlation was
              observed between the exponent and the initial porosity or diffusivity in our simulations. Additional pore
              structure characteristics need to be examined in the future.



              4. Discussion
              Our work advances our understanding and predictive capability of precipitation driven alteration of porous
              media in two ways. The modeling workflow presented enables the prediction of precipitation as a result
              of the chemical gradients developed from pore structure heterogeneity and various chemical interactions,
              in comparison with assumed uniform precipitation or other prescribed precipitation patterns. It therefore
              gives a more truthful representation of the pore-scale dynamics. In addition, while considerable variations
              were observed in the precipitation patterns among different geometries and precipitation kinetic setups,
              the macroscopic Φ  Deff relationship was fairly consistent across all the simulations. This observation con-
              firms the possibility of using this mathematical relationship for upscaling.

              Our study is nevertheless based on 2D simulations (given the prohibitively high computational cost for hun-
              dreds of full 3D simulations) of pore structures with fairly large pore sizes, whereas real systems involve three
              dimensional processes and smaller pore sizes, especially ones in which diffusion is the dominant transport
              mechanism. Regardless of these differences, we expect the major observations of our study to hold in a more
              general sense. For instance, in the experimental study of (Rajyaguru et al., 2019), a chalk was used as a proxy
              material to examine diffusion-reaction dynamics in low-permeability systems. The sample used in the exper-

              was ∼0.66 μm, one order of magnitude lower than the resolution of our model, a thin precipitation disk was
              iment had a porosity of 45%, comparable to the ones used in our study. Although the median pore throat size

              observed due to homogeneous nucleation of barite, similar to the precipitation band predicted in our simula-
              tions. More importantly, the experimental study also observed that the same amount of precipitates resulted
              in a larger reduction of the diffusivity when homogeneous nucleation was dominant. This was in contrast to
              when heterogeneous nucleation on the substrate (similar to the surface growth scenario in our simulations)
              was dominant, consistent with our observation that homogeneous nucleation results in higher Φc and lower
              porosity reduction. The traditional Archie’s law has been extensively evaluated experimentally and numeri-
              cally, and the same formulation has been recovered for 2D and 3D domains. But the exponent of Archie’s law
              was found to be lower in 2D, approximately equal to 1, than in 3D, approximately equal to 2, for various 3D
              natural media (Hunt, 2004). Following these observations, we expect that Equation 11 is broadly applicable,
              but the coefficients may be different in 3D due to the different number of degrees of freedom or different level
              of disorder, in addition to varying with the precipitation scenario and pore geometries as shown in our simu-
              lations. In this section, we discuss some of the assumptions and limitations, with the objective of increasing
              clarity of the applicability of our results and highlighting some future research needs.



DENG ET AL.                                                                                                           11 of 16
                                              Water Resources Research                                                            10.1029/2020WR028483




Figure 6. Comparison of the porosity evolution of 10 Finney pack geometries using the default linear grid-cell level tortuosity model (a), the nonlinear
tortuosity model with exponent of 2 (b) and 3 (c), and the pre-exponential coefficient (d) and exponent (e) of the Φ  Deff relationship of the three cases.


                                         4.1. Impacts of Mineral Precipitation Mechanisms and Texture

                                         Our simulations accounted for the impacts of pore geometry and precipitation kinetics of homogeneous
                                         nucleation and surface growth but did not resolve single crystals or the textures of the precipitates that can
                                         vary with nucleation and crystal growth mechanisms (Chen et al., 2014; Fazeli et al., 2020).

                                         Additional simulations for 10 Finney pack geometries and the “ssa44” case were performed to evaluate
                                         how the texture of and thus tortuosity in the developing precipitates affect the macroscopic porosity-diffu-
                                                                                                                       2         3
                                         sivity evolution. These simulations used the non-linear relationships, Dm and Dm , at the grid cell level,
                                         and showed the same trend as the linear tortuosity model simulations (Figure 6). However, for the higher
                                         exponents, the critical porosity (Φc) was larger, that is, the porosity reduction was smaller. Across the 10
                                         geometries simulated, the reduction was 1.6%–3.9% and 1.3%–3.3% for the exponent of 2 and 3, respectively;
                                         compared to 1.9%–5.3% in the linear tortuosity model simulations. This is consistent with the conceptual-
                                         ization that a larger exponent results in increased loss of connectivity for a given amount of porosity reduc-
                                         tion. Accordingly, the transport pathways are clogged at a faster speed even though the precipitation rate is
                                         the same, as illustrated by the thinner precipitation bands (Figures 6a–6c). The non-linear tortuosity model
                                         did not affect the pre-exponential coefficient of the Φ  Deff relationship noticeably, which was 0.48  0.08
                                         and 0.50  0.06 for the exponent of 2 and 3, respectively, or the exponent (n), which was 0.33  0.17 and 0.36
                                          0.14 for the exponent of 2 and 3, respectively.

                                         Another textural feature that may affect the macroscopic Φ  Deff relationship is the “microporosity”,
                                         that is, nanopores that remain in the precipitates due to reduced nucleation and precipitation rate
                                         under confinement. It has been reported that nucleation and precipitation in nanopores are prohibited
                                         or significantly reduced (Stack et al., 2014) because of the pore-size controlled solubility (PCS) effect
                                         (Emmanuel & Ague, 2009) or local transport limitations. If the PCS effect is dominant, and the diffusive


DENG ET AL.                                                                                                                                                12 of 16
                                              Water Resources Research                                                   10.1029/2020WR028483



                                                                               transport through the nanopores is non-negligible, the mixing region
                                                                               and the precipitation bands will continue to grow until precipitation
                                                                               becomes undetectable, leading to phenomenological plugging of the
                                                                               system. The corresponding Φc is expected to be lower than what would
                                                                               be expected from our pore-scale simulations, whereas the correspond-
                                                                               ing Deffc will be constrained by the tortuosity in the precipitates and
                                                                               the thickness of the precipitation band, and is likely to be larger. In
                                                                               contrast, if the predominant mechanism for the remaining nanopores
                                                                               is local transport limitation, we may expect slight increase in Φc, and
                                                                               Deffc is by definition close to zero. However, in order to quantitatively
                                                                               evaluate the impacts of microporosity, information on the amount and
Figure 7. Tracer flux at the outlet. The experimental observations are         tortuosity of the remaining nanopores is required. Thus, future stud-
shown in the open black circles, in comparison with simulation results         ies on mechanistic understanding of various nucleation and crystal
using the traditional form of Archie’s law (red dotted line) and using
                                                                               growth processes that contribute to the creation of microporosity and
the revised relationship with Deffc  1e−15 m2/s (green dotted line) and
                                                                               proper conceptualization of these processes in pore-scale models are
Deffc  5e−12 m2/s (blue dotted line). The traditional Archie’s law is given
                                                                               needed.
by Deff  1.3149 2, the exponent is the same as the revised relationship
based on literature data, and the pre-exponential factor is determined
based on the initial porosity and diffusivity reported in the experimental     4.2. Application of the Revised Relationship
study.
                                                                              The revised formulation (Equation 11) was implemented in 1D contin-
                                                                              uum simulations similar to Chagneau et al. (2015), for comparison with
                                         the column experiments. The 1D continuum model solves Equations 2, 4, 6, and 8 with equal discretization
                                         of 0.1 mm. Each grid cell is a combination of mineral grains and pore space with an initial porosity (Φini) of
                                         39% according to the CT image data. The precipitation rate follows the transition state theory rate law seed-
                                         ed with a tiny surface area initially. More details are documented in the supporting information. For the four
                                         parameters in Equation 11, the critical porosity (Φc) was set at 31% based on the post-reaction CT images.
                                         The exponent was set to be 2 according to prior studies of 3D natural rocks (Hunt, 2004; Navarre-Sitchler
                                         et al., 2009). The pre-exponential factor was constrained by the initial effective diffusivity (Deffini) of the
                                         column, that is, 4.48e−10 m2/s:

                                         a  Φ ini  Φc  
                                                                                                   n
                                         (12)            Deff ini .


                                         There was no direct measurement of Deffc, and thus two values 1e−15 m2/s and 5e−12 m2/s were tested.
                                         The simulation results were compared with the effluent tracer flux and the amount of precipitates from the
                                         experiment.

                                         In the experiment, tritiated water (HTO) was used as the tracer. The effluent flux peaked at ∼15 Bq/m2s
                                         around day 6 and stayed around 8 Bq/m2s after day 15. The precipitates were observed in a ∼6 mm zone and
                                         were largely located in a 0.35 mm thick disk, and amounted to 20–35 mg in different parallel experiments.
                                         Compared to the simple form of Archie’s law, the revised relationship provides a better agreement with the
                                         experimental observations (Figure 7 and Table S1). The case of Deffc  1e−15 m2/s implicitly assumes that

                                         this simulation, the precipitates were present in a ∼7 mm zone and amounted to 20 mg by day 80. However,
                                         diffusion limitation is the only mechanism for precipitation termination as in the pore scale simulations. In

                                         the flux went to zero after about 20 days. A Deffc of 5e−12 m2/s effectively assumes the microporosity sce-
                                         nario due to PCS effect as discussed above. The presence of microporosity was implied by the variable gray
                                         values in the CT images collected in the experimental study (Chagneau et al., 2015), even though the indi-
                                         vidual pores constitute the microporosity were not resolved given the resolution of the images. In this case,
                                         the flux remained non-zero after the initial decrease and agreed well with the experimental observations.
                                         As the suppression of precipitation in microporosity was not explicitly modeled, the simulation adopts a

                                         precipitates was ∼113 mg within a ∼9.5 mm zone. Both are larger than the low Deffc case given the higher
                                         simple treatment of setting the precipitation rate to zero when Φc was approached. The total amount of

                                         diffusive flux and mixing. This over-estimation in precipitation may be attributed to sample heterogeneity
                                         along the column that was not considered, and that different precipitation mechanisms may be present in
                                         microporosity, that is, nano-pores.



DENG ET AL.                                                                                                                                     13 of 16
                                             Water Resources Research                                                                          10.1029/2020WR028483



                                        5. Conclusions
                                        In this study, we performed numerical investigation of pore-scale precipitation dynamics and their impacts
                                        on effective diffusivity (Deff ). The modeling results reproduced precipitation patterns that were observed in
                                        previous experiments. A precipitation band formed in the scenario of homogeneous nucleation, whereas
                                        the precipitates coated the grain surfaces in the surface growth scenario. For all geometries and precipita-
                                        tion rate setups simulated, the progress of the precipitation reaction led to the decrease of domain porosity
                                        (Φ) and Deff until transport in the system was completely clogged. The surface growth scenario required
                                        more precipitation than the homogeneous nucleation scenario to clog the system and was largely influ-
                                        enced by the initial pore geometry. At a higher precipitation rate, the system was clogged with a smaller
                                        amount of the precipitate, that is, the critical porosity (Φc) was higher. Based on these observations, the
                                        Φ  Deff relationship (traditional Archie’s law) was revised to explicitly account for the clogging effect, that
                                        is, Φc and the critical effective diffusivity (Deffc) were included in the relationship. The two fitting parame-
                                        ters, the pre-exponential coefficient, and the exponent were between 0−1 for all simulations and showed
                                        large variations across different geometries. For the surface growth scenario, the exponent was slightly
                                        higher than for the homogeneous nucleation scenario. Application of this revised relationship in the 1D
                                        continuum scale model produced improved results that agree better with the column experiment compared
                                        to the traditional Archie’s law. The amount of precipitation is still over-estimated, which indicates that other
                                        precipitation mechanisms may be present that reduced mineral precipitation. Future studies are needed to
                                        better understand processes such as precipitation under confinement and to conceptualize these processes
                                        for implementation in reactive transport models.



                                        Data Availability Statement
                                        All geometry data can be accessed through the digital rock portal (https://www.digitalrocksportal.org/).
                                        The fluid chemistry and thermodynamic and kinetic data are available in the cited references: Chagneau
                                        et al. (2015), Marty et al. (2015), Nielsen & Söhnel, (1971), Palandri (2004), and Poonoosamy et al. (2019).
                                        The code of CrunchTope is available at https://bitbucket.org/crunchflow/crunchtope-dev. Example input
                                        files and database for the CrunchTope simulation can be accessed at https://github.com/denghangPU/dif-
                                        fusion-dominated-pore-scale-precipitation.git.



Acknowledgments                         References
The authors would like to acknowl-
edge the funding support by the U.S.    Cai, J., Wei, W., Hu, X., & Wood, D. A. (2017). Electrical conductivity models in saturated porous media: A review. Earth-Science Reviews,
Department of Energy, Office of            171, 419–433. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.earscirev.2017.06.013
Fossil Energy, under Award Number       Chagneau, A., Claret, F., Enzmann, F., Kersten, M., Heck, S., Made, B., & Schafer, T. (2015). Mineral precipitation-induced porosity reduc-
DE-AC02-05CH11231, the Agence              tion and its effect on transport parameters in diffusion-controlled porous media. Geochemical Transactions, 16. https://doi.org/10.1186/
Nationale de la Recherche (ANR) under      s12932-015-0027-z
Contract No. ANR-18-CE05-0035-01, a     Chen, H. L., & Park, E. (2017). Reduction in contaminant mass flux with induced oxide mineral precipitation in quasi-multidimensional
grant overseen by the French National      systems. Environmental Earth Sciences, 76(14), 8. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12665-017-6807-2
Research Agency (ANR) as part of the    Chen, L., Kang, Q., Carey, B., & Tao, W.-Q. (2014). Pore-scale study of diffusion-reaction processes involving dissolution and precipi-
“Investissements d’Avenir” Program         tation using the lattice Boltzmann method. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 75, 483–496. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
LabEx VOLTAIRE, 10-LABX-0100, and          ijheatmasstransfer.2014.03.074
the European Union’s Horizon 2020       Cil, M. B., Xie, M., Packman, A. I., & Buscarnera, G. (2017). Solute mixing regulates heterogeneity of mineral precipitation in porous me-
research and innovation program under      dia. Geophysical Research Letters, 44(13), 6658–6666. https://doi.org/10.1002/2017gl073999
Grant Agreement No. 847593.             Deng, H., Molins, S., Trebotich, D., Steefel, C., & DePaolo, D. (2018). Pore-scale numerical investigation of the impacts of surface rough-
                                           ness: Upscaling of reaction rates in rough fractures. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 239, 374–389. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
                                           gca.2018.08.005
                                        Emmanuel, S., & Ague, J. J. (2009). Modeling the impact of nano-pores on mineralization in sedimentary rocks. Water Resources Research,
                                           45, 12. https://doi.org/10.1029/2008wr007170
                                        Emmanuel, S., & Berkowitz, B. (2005). Mixing-induced precipitation and porosity evolution in porous media. Advances in Water Resources,
                                           28(4), 337–344. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.advwatres.2004.11.010
                                        Fazeli, H., Masoudi, M., Patel, R. A., Aagaard, P., & Hellevang, H. (2020). Pore-scale modeling of nucleation and growth in porous media.
                                           ACS Earth and Space Chemistry, 4(2), 249–260. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsearthspacechem.9b00290
                                        Finney, J. (2016). Finney packing of spheres. In Digital Rocks Portal. https://doi.org/10.5194/acp-2016-59-ac1
                                        Garcia-Rios, M., Luquot, L., Soler, J. M., & Cama, J. (2015). Influence of the flow rate on dissolution and precipitation features during per-
                                           colation of CO2-rich sulfate solutions through fractured limestone samples. Chemical Geology, 414, 95–108. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
                                           chemgeo.2015.09.005
                                        Griffiths, L., Heap, M. J., Wang, F., Daval, D., Gilg, H. A., Baud, P., et al. (2016). Geothermal implications for fracture-filling hydrothermal
                                           precipitation. Geothermics, 64, 235–245. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.geothermics.2016.06.006




DENG ET AL.                                                                                                                                                                  14 of 16
                    Water Resources Research                                                                           10.1029/2020WR028483


              Hunt, A. G. (2004). Continuum percolation theory and Archie's law. Geophysical Research Letters, 31(19), 4. https://doi.
                 org/10.1029/2004gl020817
              Kim, D. H., Mahabadi, N., Jang, J., & van Paassen, L. A. (2020). Assessing the kinetics and pore-scale characteristics of biological calci-
                 um carbonate precipitation in porous media using a microfluidic chip experiment. Water Resources Research, 56(2), 19. https://doi.
                 org/10.1029/2019wr025420
              Li, Q., Steefel, C. I., & Jun, Y.-S. (2017). Incorporating nanoscale effects into a continuum-scale reactive transport model for CO2-deterio-
                 rated cement. Environmental Science & Technology, 51(18), 10861–10871. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.7b00594
              Lichtner, P. C. (1996). Chapter 1. Continuum formulation of multicomponent-multiphase reactive transport. In P. C. Lichtner, C. I. Steefel,
                 & E. H. Oelkers (Eds.), Reactive transport in porous media (pp. 1–82). https://doi.org/10.1515/9781501509797-004
              Luquot, L., & Gouze, P. (2009). Experimental determination of porosity and permeability changes induced by injection of CO2 into car-
                 bonate rocks. Chemical Geology, 265(1–2), 148–159. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemgeo.2009.03.028
              Marty, N. C. M., Claret, F., Lassin, A., Tremosa, J., Blanc, P., Madé, B., et al. (2015). A database of dissolution and precipitation rates for
                 clay-rocks minerals. Applied Geochemistry, 55, 108–118. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apgeochem.2014.10.012
              Matter, J. M., Stute, M., Snaebjornsdottir, S. O., Oelkers, E. H., Gislason, S. R., Aradottir, E. S., et al. (2016). Rapid carbon mineralization
                 for permanent disposal of anthropogenic carbon dioxide emissions. Science, 352(6291), 1312–1314. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.
                 aad8132
              Menke, H. P., Bijeljic, B., & Blunt, M. J. (2017). Dynamic reservoir-condition microtomography of reactive transport in complex car-
                 bonates: Effect of initial pore structure and initial brine pH. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 204, 267–285. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
                 gca.2017.01.053
              Molins, S., Soulaine, C., Prasianakis, N. I., Abbasi, A., Poncet, P., Ladd, A. J. C., et al. (2020). Simulation of mineral dissolution at the pore
                 scale with evolving fluid-solid interfaces: Review of approaches and benchmark problem set. Computational Geosciences. https://doi.
                 org/10.1007/s10596-019-09903-x
              Molnar, I. L. (2016). Uniform quartz - Silver nanoparticle injection experiment. In Digital rocks portal. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4965587
              Nachshon, U., Shahraeeni, E., Or, D., Dragila, M., & Weisbrod, N. (2011). Infrared thermography of evaporative fluxes and dynamics of salt
                 deposition on heterogeneous porous surfaces. Water Resources Research, 47, W12519. https://doi.org/10.1029/2011WR010776
              Navarre-Sitchler, A., Steefel, C. I., Yang, L., Tomutsa, L., & Brantley, S. L. (2009). Evolution of porosity and diffusivity associated with
                 chemical weathering of a basalt clast. Journal of Geophysical Research, 114. https://doi.org/10.1029/2008jf001060
              Nielsen, A. E., & Söhnel, O. (1971). Interfacial tensions electrolyte crystal-aqueous solution, from nucleation data. Journal of Crystal
                 Growth, 11(3), 233–242. https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-0248(71)90090-x
              Noiriel, C., Steefel, C. I., Yang, L., & Ajo-Franklin, J. (2012). Upscaling calcium carbonate precipitation rates from pore to continuum scale.
                 Chemical Geology, 318–319, 60–74. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemgeo.2012.05.014
              Noiriel, C., Steefel, C. I., Yang, L., & Bernard, D. (2016). Effects of pore-scale precipitation on permeability and flow. Advances in Water
                 Resources, 95, 125–137. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.advwatres.2015.11.013
              Otsu, N. (1979). A threshold selection method from gray-level histograms. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 9(1),
                 62–66. https://doi.org/10.1109/tsmc.1979.4310076
              Palandri, J. L. (2004). A compilation of rate parameters of water-mineral interaction kinetics for application to geochemical modeling
                 [electronic resource]/by James L. Palandri and Yousif K. Kharaka, prepared in cooperation with the National Energy Technology Lab-
                 oratory. Menlo Park, Calif: United States Department of Energy, U.S. Departtment of the Interior, U.S. Geological Survey. https://doi.
                 org/10.3133/ofr20041068
              Peng, S., Hu, Q. H., & Hamamoto, S. (2012). Diffusivity of rocks: Gas diffusion measurements and correlation to porosity and pore size
                 distribution. Water Resources Research, 48, 9. https://doi.org/10.1029/2011wr011098
              Poonoosamy, J., Westerwalbesloh, C., Deissmann, G., Mahrous, M., Curti, E., Churakov, S. V., et al. (2019). A microfluidic experiment and
                 pore scale modelling diagnostics for assessing mineral precipitation and dissolution in confined spaces. Chemical Geology, 528.
              Prasianakis, N. I., Curti, E., Kosakowski, G., Poonoosamy, J., & Churakov, S. V. (2017). Deciphering pore-level precipitation mechanisms.
                 Scientific Reports, 7. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-14142-0
              Rahardianto, A., McCool, B. C., & Cohen, Y. (2008). Reverse osmosis desalting of inland brackish water of high gypsum scaling propensity:
                 Kinetics and mitigation of membrane mineral scaling. Environmental Science & Technology, 42(12), 4292–4297. https://doi.org/10.1021/
                 es702463a
              Rajyaguru, A., L'Hôpital, E., Savoye, S., Wittebroodt, C., Bildstein, O., Arnoux, P., et al. (2019). Experimental characterization of coupled
                 diffusion reaction mechanisms in low permeability chalk. Chemical Geology, 503, 29–39. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemgeo.2018.10.016
              Seigneur, N., Mayer, K. U., & Steefel, C. I. (2019). Reactive transport in evolving porous media. Reviews in Mineralogy and Geochemistry, 85,
                 197–238. https://doi.org/10.2138/rmg.2019.85.7
              Singurindy, O., Berkowitz, B., & Lowell, R. P. (2004). Carbonate dissolution and precipitation in coastal environments: Laboratory analysis
                 and theoretical consideration. Water Resources Research, 40(4), 13. https://doi.org/10.1029/2003wr002651
              Smith, M. M., Sholokhova, Y., Hao, Y., & Carroll, S. A. (2013). CO2-induced dissolution of low permeability carbonates. Part I: Characteri-
                 zation and experiments. Advances in Water Resources, 62, 370–387. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.advwatres.2013.09.008
              Soulaine, C., Roman, S., Kovscek, A., & Tchelepi, H. A. (2017). Mineral dissolution and wormholing from a pore-scale perspective. Journal
                 of Fluid Mechanics, 827, 457–483. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2017.499
              Stack, A. G., Fernandez-Martinez, A., Allard, L. F., Bañuelos, J. L., Rother, G., Anovitz, L. M., et al. (2014). Pore-size-dependent cal-
                 cium carbonate precipitation controlled by surface chemistry. Environmental Science & Technology, 48(11), 6177–6183. https://doi.
                 org/10.1021/es405574a
              Steefel, C. I., Appelo, C. A. J., Arora, B., Jacques, D., Kalbacher, T., Kolditz, O., et al. (2015). Reactive transport codes for subsurface envi-
                 ronmental simulation. Computational Geosciences, 19(3), 445–478. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10596-014-9443-x
              Steefel, C. I., Beckingham, L. E., & Landrot, G. (2015). Micro-continuum approaches for modeling pore-scale geochemical processes.
                 Reviews in Mineralogy and Geochemistry, 80, 217–246. https://doi.org/10.2138/rmg.2015.80.07
              Steefel, C. I., DePaolo, D. J., & Lichtner, P. C. (2005). Reactive transport modeling: An essential tool and a new research approach for the
                 Earth sciences. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 240(3–4), 539–558. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epsl.2005.09.017
              Steefel, C. I., & Lasaga, A. C. (1994). A coupled model for transport of multiple chemical species and kinetic precipitation/dissolution
                 reactions with application to reactive flow in single phase hydrothermal systems. American Journal of Science, 294(5), 529–592. https://
                 doi.org/10.2475/ajs.294.5.529
              Steefel, C. I., & Lichtner, P. C. (1994). Diffusion and reaction in rock matrix bordering a hyperalkaline fluid-filled fracture. Geochimica et
                 Cosmochimica Acta, 58(17), 3595–3612. https://doi.org/10.1016/0016-7037(94)90152-x



DENG ET AL.                                                                                                                                          15 of 16
                   Water Resources Research                                                                          10.1029/2020WR028483


              Steefel, C. I., & Lichtner, P. C. (1998). Multicomponent reactive transport in discrete fractures: I. Controls on reaction front geometry.
                 Journal of Hydrology, 209(1–4), 186–199. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0022-1694(98)00146-2
              Steinwinder, J., & Beckingham, L. E. (2019). Role of pore and pore-throat distributions in controlling permeability in heterogeneous min-
                 eral dissolution and precipitation scenarios.Water Resources Research, 55(7), 5502–5517. https://doi.org/10.1029/2019wr024793
              Tartakovsky, A. M., Redden, G., Lichtner, P. C., Scheibe, T. D., & Meakin, P. (2008). Mixing-induced precipitation: Experimental study and
                 multiscale numerical analysis. Water Resources Research, 44(6). https://doi.org/10.1029/2006wr005725
              Vankeuren, A. N. P., Hakala, J. A., Jarvis, K., & Moore, J. E. (2017). Mineral reactions in shale gas reservoirs: Barite scale formation from
                 reusing produced water as hydraulic fracturing fluid. Environmental Science & Technology, 51(16), 9391–9402.
              Wright, R. N., Hartmann, T., & Fujita, Y. (2011). Inducing mineral precipitation in groundwater by addition of phosphate. Geochemical
                 Transactions, 12, 8. https://geochemicaltransactions.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/1467-4866-12-8
              Xie, M., Mayer, K. U., Claret, F., Alt-Epping, P., Jacques, D., Steefel, C., et al. (2015). Implementation and evaluation of permeability-poros-
                 ity and tortuosity-porosity relationships linked to mineral dissolution-precipitation. Computers & Geosciences, 19(3), 655–671. https://
                 doi.org/10.1007/s10596-014-9458-3
              Yoon, H., Valocchi, A. J., Werth, C. J., & Dewers, T. (2012). Pore-scale simulation of mixing-induced calcium carbonate precipitation and
                 dissolution in a microfluidic pore network. Water Resources Research, 48(2). https://doi.org/10.1029/2011wr011192
              Zhang, C., Dehoff, K., Hess, N., Oostrom, M., Wietsma, T. W., Valocchi, A. J., et al. (2010). Pore-scale study of transverse mixing induced
                 CaCO3 precipitation and permeability reduction in a model subsurface sedimentary system. Environmental Science & Technology,
                 44(20), 7833–7838. https://doi.org/10.1021/es1019788
              Zhang, C., Kang, Q., Wang, X., Zilles, J. L., Müller, R. H., & Werth, C. J. (2010). Effects of pore-scale heterogeneity and transverse mixing on
                 bacterial growth in porous media. Environmental Science & Technology, 44(8), 3085–3092. https://doi.org/10.1021/es903396h
              Zou, C., Zhu, R., Liu, K., Su, L., Bai, B., Zhang, X., et al. (2012). Tight gas sandstone reservoirs in China: Characteristics and recognition
                 criteria. Journal of Petroleum Science and Engineering, 88–89, 82–91. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.petrol.2012.02.001




DENG ET AL.                                                                                                                                        16 of 16
