Reviews in Mineralogy & Geochemistry
Vol. 85 pp. 197-238, 2019                                                                        7
Copyright © Mineralogical Society of America




          Reactive Transport in Evolving Porous Media
                           Nicolas Seigneur, K. Ulrich Mayer
                   Department of Earth, Ocean and Atmospheric Sciences
                              University of British Columbia
                                  2020-2207 Main Mall
                          Vancouver, British Columbia, V6T 1Z4
                                         Canada
                             nseigneur@eoas.ubc.ca; umayer@eoas.ubc.ca

                                         Carl I. Steefel
                                 Energy Geosciences Division
                            Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
                             1 Cyclotron Road, Berkeley, CA 94720
                                            USA
                                          CISteefel@lbl.gov


                                        INTRODUCTION
       Reactive transport modeling is a process-based approach that accounts for advection,
diffusion, dispersion and a multitude of biogeochemical reactions. The occurrence of these
reactions, by nature, tends to affect the properties of porous media in many ways (Tenthorey and
Gerald 2006). If these alteration reactions are significant, then feedback mechanisms could occur
that influence the flow of groundwater as well as the migration of solutes and gases through
porous media (Le Gallo et al. 1998; Kaszuba et al. 2005; Jin et al. 2013). In addition, changes
induced by the reactions on the solid grains can also affect the rates of the reactions themselves
(Hao et al. 2012; Harrison et al. 2017). A prime example for reactive transport in evolving porous
media is the dissolution of mineral phases. If dissolution reactions are substantial, the porosity,
i.e., the void space between grains or apertures of fractures in jointed rocks, will increase. Such
an increase in porosity commonly has secondary effects, by altering the connectivity or larger
scale pores in the porous medium under consideration (Navarre-Sitchler et al. 2009). Together,
these changes in porosity and connectivity can substantially affect flow and transport processes
by modifying the key transport parameters such as the medium’s permeability and tortuosity,
leading to alteration of the groundwater flow regime and modification of transport pathways.
The impact of these changes can affect transport in the water phase as well as in the gas phase. In
addition, because mineral dissolution reshapes the surface of the dissolving phases or leads to the
complete dissolution of smaller particles, the system’s reactivity can be affected as well, leading
to a direct feedback on reaction progress and rates (Noiriel et al. 2009).
     The dissolution of minerals is only one example for evolving porous media. Flow
and transport properties can be affected by a multitude of other processes such as mineral
precipitation, possibly leading to clogging (Gaucher and Blanc 2006; Brovelli et al. 2009;
Chagneau et al. 2015) or modification of the pore size distribution (Emmanuel et al. 2010,
2015), microbial activity leading to the growth of biofilms (Kim and Fogler 2000; Ezeuko et
al. 2011) or bioclogging (Thullner et al. 2002), swelling of clays (Herbert et al. 2008; Sedighi
and Thomas 2014; Wang et al. 2014), and variations in surface loading and temperatures
leading to the expansion or contraction of porous media and possibly the formation or closure
1529-6466/19/0085-0007$05.00 (print)                          http://dx.doi.org/10.2138/rmg.2019.85.7
1943-2666/19/0085-0007$05.00 (online)
198                                     Seigneur et al.

of fractures (Pfingsten 2002; MacQuarrie and Mayer 2005; Tian et al. 2014). In this chapter,
we will focus on evolving porous media as affected by biogeochemical reactions with an
emphasis on mineral dissolution and precipitation.
      Specific examples where biogeochemical reactions result in the evolution of porous media
include wellbore integrity studies. It has been shown that the productivity of wells can decrease
due to clogging. Houben (2003) showed that chemical processes including corrosion and
mineral precipitation account for more than 90% of ageing of wells, leading to a decrease in their
productivity. In addition, geochemical interactions at interfaces between cementitious materials
and clay can lead to the formation of an impermeable layer of calcite and other secondary
minerals, effectively blocking solute transfer across the interfaces (Dauzères et al. 2010, 2019).
These processes are important in the context of the safety assessment for the long-term storage
of spent nuclear fuel (Atkinson et al. 1987; Spycher et al. 2003; Soler and Mäder 2005; Yang
et al. 2008). An additional example where evolution of porous media is of importance is the
long-term evolution of mine waste deposits. In these systems, the formation of alteration rims
and secondary mineral formation has a strong impact on reactivity, leading to a decline of acid
generation and metal release over time due to surface passivation (Blowes and Jambor 1990;
Wunderly et al. 1996; Johnson et al. 2000). In extreme situations, extensive secondary mineral
formation can lead to the formation of hard-pans (Blowes et al. 1991), with a pronounced effect
on transport parameters. Furthermore, systems designed for the treatment of contaminated
groundwater are also often affected by evolving transport and reactivity parameters. The
precipitation of secondary mineral phases leads to passivation of carbonate minerals and limited
pH-buffering capacity in limestone drains for the treatment of acid rock drainage (Hammarstrom
et al. 2003; Rötting et al. 2008). Groundwater treatment by permeable reactive barriers (Blowes
et al. 2000) or by bioremediation (Hazen and Fliermans 1995; Ritter and Scarborough 1995) is
frequently affected by the growth of biofilms, which can have detrimental effects on the efficacy
of the remediation effort and modifies permeability and transport parameters (Scherer et al.
2000; Li et al. 2006; Wantanaphong et al. 2006). The precipitation of secondary oxide phases
in case of groundwater remediation via in-situ chemical oxidation with permanganate also may
result in less effective contaminant treatment or contaminant encapsulation (Nelson et al. 2001;
Henderson et al. 2009). Furthermore, evolving porous media plays a role in the clogging and
passivation of permeable reactive barriers used for the treatment of chlorinated solvents and
metals, which occurs due to pronounced changes in pH and redox conditions causing secondary
mineral formation (Ouellet et al. 2006; Jeen et al. 2007).
     Accounting for the evolution of porous media is not only of importance in man-made and
engineered systems, but is equally relevant in natural environments, where transport and chemical
properties can exhibit significant variation in space and time (Gouze and Coudrain-Ribstein 2002;
White et al. 2005; Jin et al. 2013; Opolot and Finke 2015). A key example is the progress of
weathering and soil formation. Also, karst formation caused by dissolution reactions of soluble
minerals (predominantly carbonate minerals and gypsum) induced by the ingress of slightly
acidic and dilute recharge. Birk et al. (2003, 2005) reported that the evolution of heterogeneity
patterns strongly depends on flow and weathering rates. Karst development is obtained by
positive feedback between reaction and flow (Hartmann et al. 2014): higher flow rates, lead to
higher dissolution rates, resulting in higher porosity and permeability, in turn further increasing
flow rates (Xiao et al. 2007). Kaufmann et al. (2010) showed that in karst systems permeability
can vary by up to 9 orders of magnitude between fractures and the solid matrix. The morphology
of the karst systems strongly depends on dissolution kinetics (Raines and Dewers 1997).
     In addition, precipitation reactions in natural systems can have significant consequences
for porous media evolution. Cementation (Giles et al. 2000; Putnis and Mauthe 2001; Pape
et al. 2005) can reduce porosity and permeability, while strengthening the soil mechanical
properties. It has also been shown that soil hydraulic properties can be decreased due to
                      Reactive Transport in Evolving Porous Media                              199

biogeochemical reactions causing bioclogging or biocementation (Ivanov and Chu 2008).
Sedimentary rocks are often cemented due to the precipitation of clay minerals on the
solid grain surfaces (Peters 2009). Such precipitation reactions can also have an impact on
the reactivity of the primary minerals. Peters (2009) showed that while secondary minerals
only occupied a volume fraction of 5-30%, they represented 65-86% of the reactive surface.
Precipitation of secondary minerals can also lead to the sealing of fractures (Noiriel et al.
2010; Zhang 2011, 2013; Phillips et al. 2016). A decrease of permeability is often observed in
certain hydrothermally altered rocks induced by mineral precipitation (Fontaine et al. 2001;
Dobson et al. 2003a; Polak et al. 2003; Giger et al. 2007). Mineral precipitation can also lead
to the formation of skarn (Meinert et al. 2003) or calcrete (Wang et al. 1994). In addition,
several authors reported a correlation between chemical weathering and landslide occurrence
(Jaboyedoff et al. 2004; Watanabe et al. 2005; Opfergelt et al. 2006; Regmi et al. 2013),
implying that mechanical properties are evolving as chemical weathering progresses.
     Despite the widespread relevance of reactive transport processes leading to changes in porous
media properties, parameters such as porosity, permeability, effective diffusion coefficients and
reactivity have often been considered constant in time in previous modeling efforts. The most
common exception to this assumption has been in the consideration of the impact of changes
in water content (Millington and Quirk 1961). Modeling studies of reaction induced porosity
and permeability change date from the early 1990s, with Steefel and Lasaga (1992) presenting
what appears to be the first numerical study of the reactive infiltration instability discussed by
Ortoleva et al. (1987). In a later study of reactive transport in hydrothermal systems, Steefel
and Lasaga (1994) analyzed the impact of quartz precipitation in fractures occurring as fluids
cooled. They found that, unlike the reactive infiltration instability or “wormholing” effect due
to dissolution of the rock matrix wherein reactive flow becomes increasingly focused in a
smaller number of flow pathways, quartz precipitation had the effect of diffusing the flow paths
over an increasingly wider volume, to the point where a convection cell might even reorganize
completely. In another modeling study, Steefel and Lichtner (1994) showed how reactions in
the rock matrix bordering a fracture could lead to “armoring” of the fracture, or isolation of the
fracture volume from the surrounding rock matrix. Modeling was also used to show that the
delicate balance between cementation of the rock matrix and the fracture itself can determine
the subsequent evolution of the entire fractured rock system (Steefel and Lichtner 1998). The
effect of evolving pore connectivity and tortuosity and their effect on diffusivity was considered
in the modeling of chemical weathering of basaltic fragments (Navarre-Sitchler et al. 2011).
Evolving reactivity has been less commonly treated in reactive transport models, except for
the relatively straightforward case of dissolving (disappearing) phases where the reactive
surface area necessarily must go to zero. However, one modeling study based on reactive flow
experiments with calcite conducted in capillary tubes showed that it was necessary to consider
the formation of high surface area precipitates in order to capture the evolving reactivity of the
system (Noiriel et al. 2012). In a study of CO2 injection into reactive volcanogenic sands, it
was shown the use of a grain size distribution could capture at least part of the evolution of the
reactivity of the system (Beckingham et al. 2017).
      The simplification of the assumption of constant transport and reactivity parameters in
modeling is due in part to the inherent difficulty of describing the temporal evolution of these
parameters due to changes in porous media structure and composition. Traditionally, reactive
transport has been simulated using upscaled parameters, i.e., on the continuum or Representative
Elementary Volume (REV) scale. On this scale, relationships have been developed that describe
interdependencies between transport parameters and porosity (e.g., Akanni et al. 1987; Hommel et
al. 2018) as well as evolving surface area and reactivity. However, these relationships are commonly
empirical in nature and have been developed based on fitting to experimental data (e.g., Low 1981;
Tomadakis and Sotirchos 1993), or are based on theoretical considerations (e.g., Petersen 1958).
200                                       Seigneur et al.

     In reality, geochemical reactions and the processes controlling the evolution of porous media
occur at the pore scale. Given the complexity and heterogeneity of the pore structure, the wide
range of chemical perturbations and the coupling between these different processes, obtaining
a representative evolution of the effective properties of the porous medium in a continuum
approach can be a challenge. With the recent advent of improved imaging techniques such
as X-ray microtomography (e.g., Werth et al. 2010), the development of improved pore-scale
model formulations (e.g., Navarre-Sitchler et al. 2009; Dewanckele et al. 2012; Beckingham et
al. 2013; Vilcáez et al. 2017), and substantial advances in computational power, the exploration
of processes on the pore scale has become possible from both an experimental and modeling
perspective. As a result, recent studies have focused more on describing these phenomena at the
pore-scale (Molins et al. 2012, 2014; Steefel et al. 2013; Trebotich et al. 2014; Molins 2015;
Deng et al. 2018). Although many advances have been made in pore scale investigations in
recent years, it is difficult to simulate reactive transport on larger scales (on the orders of m’s to
km’s) using pore scale approaches, although recently developed hybrid multi-scale approaches
might handle this problem. For such studies, it is necessary to continue relying on continuum
approaches. However, pore scale studies are providing deeper understanding and insights, which
in turn can be incorporated to advance continuum approaches.
     In this chapter, we will briefly review the governing equations of multiphase flow and
reactive transport on the continuum scale, emphasizing the parameters that are affected by
biogeochemical reactions in evolving porous media, and defining them from a pore scale
perspective. We will then review recent studies carried out on the pore scale to provide insights
and fundamental understanding on processes that affect and control porous media parameters.
Subsequently, we will return to the continuum scale to provide a summary of the common
approaches used to describe evolving flow, transport and reaction parameters such as porosity,
permeability, tortuosity and reactive surface area. In this context, we review different approaches
taken by the community to take these phenomena into considerations. We will then follow up
with selected reactive transport modeling case studies, accounting for evolving properties in
porous media. Finally, we will provide an outlook on future work and opportunities to work
towards an integrated model for describing reactive transport in evolving porous media and
challenges associated with filling the gap between pore scale and continuum approaches.


                  CONTINUUM SCALE GOVERNING EQUATIONS
                        AND EVOLVING PARAMETERS
Governing equations
    In porous media, variably saturated flow is modeled by the coupled two-phase flow
equations (Xu et al. 2011), described by Sin et al. (2017) as:

                     S      k k                
                                r  p   g    Q  0        (  l, g )
                       t                                                                     (1)


where t [s] is time, f is porosity [–], α denotes the fluid phase, either liquid (l) or gas (g), Sα is
the saturation of the fluid phase α [–], krα is the phase relative permeability [–]. pα is the fluid
pressure [kg m−1 s−2], and Qα is a source-sink term for the fluid phase α [s−1]. ra is the fluid
density [kg m−3], g [m s−2] is the gravitational acceleration, ma [kg m−1 s−1] is the fluid dynamic
viscosity and k is the intrinsic permeability tensor [m²]. However, some of the reactive transport
simulators do not model the coupled two-phase flow (Steefel et al. 2015a), but instead use a
simplified approach through Richards’ equation (Neuman 1973; Panday et al. 1993):
                        Reactive Transport in Evolving Porous Media                                          201


                                          h    S      g        
                                  Ss Sl        l    l krl kh   Ql  0                                (2)
                                          t    t      
                                                        l         
where h is the hydraulic head [m] and Ss defines the specific storage coefficient [m−1]. The
latter approach does not consider gas advection.
     In variably saturated media, the reactive transport equations in global implicit form can be
written as (Lichtner 1996; Mayer et al. 2002)
                            
             Sa T jl    Sg T jg     qgT jg 
         t                  t                                                                              (3)
               qlT jl      Sl D lT jl      Sg  DgT jg   Q ext
                                                                                   j  Qj  0
                                                                                        int
                                                                                                j  1, N c
where ql and qg are the Darcy flux vectors, representing the specific discharges in both phases
[m s−1]. For single phase flow formulation using Richards’ equation (Eqn. 2), the gas specific
discharge qg is not considered. Tjl [mol L−1 H2O] and Tjg [mol L−1 gas] define the total aqueous/
gaseous component concentrations for the j-th component. Qjint [mol dm−3 porous medium]
are internal source and sink terms due to all kinetically controlled reactions, including mineral
dissolution–precipitation reactions. Qjext [mol dm−3 porous medium] are external source and
sink terms and define mass fluxes across the domain boundaries for the aqueous and gas phases
and Nc defines the number of components. Dl and Dg are the hydrodynamic dispersion tensors
[m2 s−1] for the aqueous and gas phases, respectively. The dispersion tensors include the
contributions of molecular diffusion and mechanical dispersion, a process by which dissolved
species migrate at different rates than the average linear groundwater velocity due the small-
scale heterogeneities. In Equation (3), molecular diffusion is integrated into the hydrodynamic
dispersion tensor in the form of the pore diffusion coefficient, defined as:

                                                      Dp   D0                                           (4)
where D is the pore diffusion coefficient of phase a (aqueous or gas phase), ta is the tortuosity
        p
        α
of phase a [–], and Dα0 is the free phase diffusion coefficient in phase a. The tortuosity accounts
for diffusion along tortuous pathways through the porous medium due to the presence of
grains and partial phase saturation, leading to a reduction of the pore diffusion coefficient in
comparison to the free phase diffusion coefficient. Following previous definitions, tortuosity
is here defined as a value smaller than unity (as in Steefel and Maher 2009), capturing that the
presence of tortuous pathways leads to a decline in the pore diffusion coefficient. However,
it should be noted that in other studies, an inverse definition has been used, in which case
tortuosity is proportional to the length of the tortuous diffusion pathway in relation to the
direct pathway, therefore giving values greater than unity (Walsh and Brace 1984; Hommel et
al. 2018). Using this alternative formulation, Equation (4) would have to be modified, since
for any formulation, the pore diffusion coefficient is smaller than the free phase diffusion
                                                                                                 e
coefficient. For completeness, it must also be noted that the effective diffusion coefficient Dα,
representative for the rate of solute or gas diffusion through a porous medium, is obtained
by multiplying the pore diffusion coefficient (Eqn. 4) with the phase saturation and porosity,
which is accounted for in Equation (3).
    In addition to the mass balance equations for the aqueous and gas phase (Eqn. 3), it is also
necessary to define mass balance equations for reactive minerals (Steefel and Lasaga 1994):

                                   di                                                     (5)
                                        Vi m Rim    i  1, N m
                                    dt
where ϕi is the mineral volume fraction [dm3 mineral dm−3 porous medium] of a mineral
phase, Vim is the molar volume of the mineral [dm3 mineral mol−1], Rim is the mineral i overall
202                                                    Seigneur et al.

dissolution–precipitation rate [mol dm−3 porous medium s−1], and Nm is the number of mineral
phases. The reaction rate Rim is commonly a function of solution composition including pH, but
also the exposure of the mineral to the pore water, defining its intrinsic reactivity. Reactivity
is commonly controlled by the reactive surface area. A mineral dissolution precipitation rate
can therefore be expressed as:

                =Rim S=         l
                      i ki f (C j , pH ) i 1, Nm; j = 1, N s                                             (6)
where Si [m2 mineral dm−3 bulk] is the reactive surface area for the mineral i, ki is the surface
                                                         l
area normalized rate constant [mol m−2 mineral s−1], C j is the concentration of a chemical
                          −1
species in solution [mol L H2O] and Ns is the number of dissolved species.


             GOVERNING PARAMETERS AND INTERDEPENDENCIES
     Equations (1–6) include several parameters that can evolve in response to biogeochemical
reactions, namely:
      • porosity f permeability tensor k;
      • tortuosity ta;
      • mineral reactive surface area Si as a surrogate for reactivity.
     Figure 1 depicts the dependencies of groundwater flow, transport processes and geochemical
reactions on these parameters and illustrates how changes of these parameters lead to
interdependencies and feedback mechanisms between the flow, transport and reaction domains.
Since the dissolution of mineral phases will lead to a decline in the volume filled with the solid
phase, an increase in porosity will result. The increase in porosity, in turn, will tend to cause
changes in permeability and tortuosity. In addition, the reactive surface area may also be altered
as a mineral progressively dissolves. Based on this analysis and considering Equations (1–6)
together, it becomes clear that mineral dissolution has the potential to directly affect groundwater
flow (both porosity f and k are featured in Eqn. 1 and 2), advective solute/gas transport, since
the specific discharges in Equation (3) depends on k, and diffusive solute and gas transport,
since the diffusion coefficients are a function of ta (Eqn. 4). In addition, the fact that porosity is
included in some terms of the multicomponent reactive transport Equation (4), but not in others,
reveals the effect of changes in the water-rock ratios on the mass balance. Similar considerations
are valid for precipitation reactions or the formation of biofilms. It becomes evident that
biogeochemical processes have the potential to cause several feedback mechanisms, increasing


                            unsaturated – multiphase flow
                          unsaturated  – multiphase flow
                                  = 𝑓𝑓(𝜙𝜙, ℎ, 𝑆𝑆𝛼𝛼 , 𝒌𝒌)         𝑞𝑞

                               solute and gas transport
                             solute  and gas transport
                                 = 𝑓𝑓(𝜙𝜙, 𝜏𝜏𝛼𝛼 , 𝑆𝑆𝛼𝛼 , 𝑞𝑞)
                                                                         𝜏𝜏𝛼𝛼        𝑘𝑘
                                                                 𝑇𝑇𝑗𝑗
                              biogeochemical reactions
                            biogeochemical         reactions
                                   = 𝑓𝑓(𝜙𝜙, 𝑆𝑆𝑖𝑖 , 𝑇𝑇𝑗𝑗 )        𝜑𝜑𝑖𝑖           𝜙𝜙
                                                                 𝑆𝑆𝑖𝑖

 Figure 1. Schematic diagram outlining interactions between flow, transport and reaction processes, includ-
 ing feedback mechanisms.
                        Reactive Transport in Evolving Porous Media                                      203

the inter-dependencies of the equations governing flow and reactive transport (Fig. 1). In order
to understand the evolution of these parameters at the continuum scale, it is instructive to review
how biogeochemical processes control porous media evolution on the pore scale.


              EVOLUTION OF POROUS MEDIA AT THE PORE SCALE
     As most of the relevant physicochemical processes occur at the pore-scale, an understanding
of processes that occur at this scale is essential for developing an appreciation on how flow,
transport and reaction parameters evolve, how these processes and parameters are linked to each
other, and how these parameters affect reactive transport both at the pore and continuum scales.
Porous media structure at the pore scale—Effective porosity and connectivity
     With the advent of modern, non-invasive imaging techniques, it has become possible to
visualize the structure of porous media on the pore scale. Werth et al. (2010) provide a review
of these methods including X-Ray microtomography, Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Imaging
(NMR) and optical imaging methods, as well as their applications in hydrogeology and reactive
transport. Specifically, the use of 3D X-Ray microtomography has found increasing applications
due to its high resolution. These imaging techniques allow visualizing pore structure at sub-
micron resolution, providing a window into the complex nature of porous media.
     Figure 2a depicts a 3D micro-CT image of the pore space of a limestone (Blunt et al.
2013). This limestone sample is characterized by large well-connected pores (Blunt et al.
2013). Based on such images, it is possible to construct pore network models (Fig. 2b), in
which the pores are represented as spheres, while the pore throats are shown as cylinders,
connecting the pores with each other (Blunt et al. 2013). In many situations, a fraction of
the pores can be isolated, i.e., disconnected (trapped porosity), while other pores are difficult
to reach (Navarre-Sitchler et al. 2009). Although connected to the pore-network, they are
“dead-end” pores, and therefore do not contribute substantially to the “effective porosity”
(Navarre-Sitchler et al. 2009). The connectivity, in principle, is defined by the ratio between
the connected (i.e., effective) porosity and the overall porosity.




 Figure 2. a) Pore-space images of a quarry carbonate. The image shows only the pore space. b) Pore net-
 works extracted from the image shown in a). The pore space is represented as a lattice of wide pores (shown
 as spheres) connected by narrower throats (shown as cylinders). The size of the pore or throat indicates the
 inscribed radius. [Reproduced in modified form form MJ Blunt et al. (2013) Pore-scale imaging and model-
 ling. Advances in Water Resources 51:187-216 with permission of Elsevier. Copyright 2013].
204                                         Seigneur et al.

Evolution of flow and transport parameters at the pore scale
     Examining the pore network shown in Figure 2 clarifies that flow and transport through
such a material will heavily depend on the size of the pores, the diameter of the pore throats,
and the connectivity between the pores. Large pores and direct connectivity in three dimensions
implies a low degree of tortuosity, facilitating flow, and both diffusive as well as advective
transport with relative ease.
     In the case of an evolving porous medium affected by mineral dissolution–precipitation
reactions, it is evident that both porosity and connectivity can be affected. The dissolution of a
solid phase is directly linked to the increase of the overall porosity. However, dissolution does
not necessarily increase effective porosity to the same degree. The effect can be substantial, if
dissolution widens and opens up pore throats or opens up new diffusion pathways (Knackstedt
and Zhang 1994; Moreira and Coury 2004), or it can be more limited, if dissolution is more
equally distributed (Algive et al. 2010). Similarly, mineral precipitation might have a limited
effect on connectivity, if minerals form on existing surfaces without clogging pore throats.
On the other hand, precipitation may lead to the disconnection of existing solute migration
pathways (Algive et al. 2010), with a pronounced impact on flow and transport parameters.
These theoretical considerations imply that for the same change in total porosity, the dissolution
and precipitation of minerals can lead to very different impacts on effective porosity and
connectivity. As a consequence, flow and transport will also be affected in different ways
due to the evolution of tortuosity and permeability as a function of effective porosity and
connectivity, but not simply total porosity (Navarre-Sitchler et al. 2009).
Evolution of reactivity at the pore scale
    In addition to changes in transport properties, the dissolution and precipitation of mineral
phases, can result in changes in reactivity, leading to enhancement or reduction of reaction rates
Normally, the dissolution of a mineral phase is controlled by mineral-specific surface-area-
normalized reaction rates and by the reactive surface area of the mineral (Lasaga 1981, 2014).
     The reactive surface area is controlled by a variety of factors, such as grain size
(Emmanuel and Berkowitz 2007; Liu et al. 2008), exposure of the mineral and contact with the
pore water (Landrot et al. 2012), the degree of occlusion (Peters 2009; Lai and Krevor 2014),
surface roughness and presence of imperfections or etch-pits (Deng et al. 2018). Moreover,
when multiple minerals are present, the surface fraction occupied by a certain mineral might
significantly differ from its volume fraction (Lai and Krevor 2014). Also, the flow conditions
can lead to more reactive zones, contributing to commonly observed deviations of reactive
from geometric surface area. Together, these factors control the magnitude of the effective
reactive surface area (Jung and Navarre-Sitchler 2018).
          a)                                           b)




 Figure 3. Evolution of reactivity and surface passivation: a) SEM image of partially oxidized pyrite grain
 with Fe(III) oxy-hydroxide surface coatings, b) STEM image showing goethite and vermiculite formation
 from incongruent dissolution of biotite (passivation) along a grain-boundary pore space. [Image credits:
 Tom Al, University of Ottawa, reproduced with permission.]
                      Reactive Transport in Evolving Porous Media                               205

     Any of these factors can change over time, as a porous medium progressively evolves, simply
through shrinking of grain size, the enhancement of surface roughness and etch pit formation
during dissolution (Teng 2004; Buss et al. 2007), incongruent dissolution as shown in Figure 3a
for pyrite oxidation, or the formation of precipitates on the surface of a dissolving mineral.
Secondary Fe(III)-oxy-hydroxides tend to precipitate on the surface of pyrite grains (Fig. 3a).
Similarly, Figure 3b shows the precipitation of secondary oxide and clay minerals (goethite and
vermiculite) on the surface of biotite, which is undergoing weathering. Incongruent dissolution
and the formation of surface precipitates limit the interaction of the bulk solution with the surface
of the minerals and in this way, tends to limit further mineral dissolution (Daval et al. 2009).


          EFFECT OF MINERAL DISSOLUTION AND PRECIPITATION
                         ON POROUS MEDIA
    Considering that mineral-dissolution precipitation reactions have a pronounced impact on
porous media evolution, we review these processes in more detail in the following sections,
making a distinction between dissolution and precipitation reactions. In this context, we
emphasize the evolution of porosity and transport parameters, as well as the interactions
between the rate of flow and transport processes and reactions and the resulting effect on
porous media evolution. Processes are discussed predominantly at the pore scale, keeping
implications for the continuum scale in mind.
Mineral dissolution
     In many situations, sedimentary deposits or fractured rocks are affected by weathering
reactions involving the dissolution and alteration of their solid structure (Bjørlykke et al. 1989;
Aharonov et al. 2004; Navarre-Sitchler et al. 2011; Jin et al. 2013). The oil and gas industry
performed a substantial amount of research dedicated to understand and optimize the process
of permeability enhancement via mineral dissolution with the goal of increasing production
rates (Wang et al. 1993; Fredd and Fogler 1999; McDuff et al. 2010). Another example with
relevance to the mining industry is the enhancement of in-situ uranium recovery (Simon et al.
2014; Regnault et al. 2015; Lagneau 2019, this volume) by using acidic solutions to dissolve
uranium-containing minerals. In the case of construction materials, the dissolution of primary
minerals is commonly a process that is unwanted. Indeed, the increase of porosity usually
induces a decrease of the material’s intended performance. Negative effects of leaching and
acid attack on the properties of cement and concr have been demonstrated (Atkinson et al.
1987; Bentz and Garboczi 1992; Bertron et al. 2005).
     As dissolution reactions can impact groundwater flow and solute transport through porous
media, reactive transport modelling of the aforementioned problems has to account for the impact
of dissolution on the relevant material properties. To predict how a porous medium’s properties
will evolve through dissolution reactions, it is necessary to understand the processes that control
the development of dissolution patterns. Previous investigations of mineral dissolution have
revealed that, under certain conditions, stable dissolution fronts develop (Barlet-Gouedard et
al. 2006; Hesse et al. 2013; Walsh et al. 2013), while in other cases, such as karst development,
dissolution fronts become unstable, leading to the development of fingering or wormholing
(Hoefner and Fogler 1988; Daccord et al. 1989; Steefel and Lasaga 1990; Golfier et al. 2002).
     Aharonov et al. 2004; Algive et al. 2012 and Luhmann et al. 2014 have shown that the
dissolution regime depends on the characteristic times for advection, diffusion and reaction.
Typically, relationships between characteristic times of transport and reaction processes are
defined by the Peclet (Pe) and Damköhler (Da) numbers. The Peclet number addresses the
relative importance of the advective and diffusive transport (Algive et al. 2010), while the
Damköhler numbers reflect the ratio between the characteristic times of reaction compared to
that of transport (Tartakovsky et al. 2007; Min et al. 2016). The Peclet number is defined as:
206                                              Seigneur et al.


                                                     vL                                        (7)
                                                        Pe =
                                                     D
where v represents the groundwater flow velocity, D the diffusion coefficient and L is a
characteristic length of interest in the porous media. A high Peclet number reflects an advection-
dominated transport regime. Two versions of the Damköhler number exist, which here will be
referred to as the advective and diffusive Damköhler numbers, respectively. The Da numbers
provide a relationship between the reaction rate and the transport (advection–diffusion) rates

                                                         reaction rate
                                         Daadv =                                                                    (8)
                                                    advective transport rate

                                                         reaction rate
                                         Dadiff =                                                                   (9)
                                                    diffusive transport rate

     Experimental and numerical research has focused on the prediction of wormhole formation in
carbonate rocks (Fredd et al. 2000; Buijse et al. 2005; Quintard et al. 2007; Budek and Szymczak 2012).
     Fredd et al. (2000) reviewed the response of carbonate rocks to ingress of acidic waters.
Figure 4 depicts the different dissolution patterns for different acid injection rates (increasing
from left to right). At very low injection rates (low Pe, high Daadv), uniform face dissolution
occurs near the injection point where all the acid is consumed. Increasing Pe facilitates deeper
ingress of acidic waters along the main flow pathway where reactions take place, leading to
a conical or dominant wormhole. The distinction between the conical/dominant wormholes
and ramified or uniform dissolution was further evaluated by Detwiler et al. (2003). When
the injection rate is further increased (to the point where Daadv becomes ≪ 1), acidic waters
are forced through the entire porous medium without having time to react, leading to the
formation of a ramified wormhole and ultimately uniform dissolution. The effects of Peclet
and Damkӧhler number were analyzed with numerical modeling as early as 1990 (Steefel and
Lasaga 1994), who showed the transition from dominant wormholes to ramified wormholes
and uniform dissolution with decreasing Damkӧhler number.




  Figure 4. Illustration of the different wormhole morphologies. Injection rates applied to the materials increase from
  the left to the right. [Republished with permission of the Society of Petroleum Engineers, from CN Fredd (2000)
  Dynamic model of wormhole formation demonstrates conditions for effective skin reduction during carbonate
  matrix acidizing. SPE Permian Basin Oil and Gas Recovery Conference:SPE-59537-MS. Copyright 2000.]
                         Reactive Transport in Evolving Porous Media                                             207

     These diverse dissolution patterns lead to different evolution of transport properties. As
uniform facial dissolution leads to a focused increased in permeability near the injection point,
the macroscopic transport properties of the entire material do not change significantly. On the
other hand, uniform dissolution tends to increase permeability throughout the entire sample.
For situations between the two extremes cases, the development of a broad and relatively
linear transport pathway ensues, through which most solutes can be transported. The latter
case results in the formation of wormholes.
     Min et al. (2016) performed a pore-scale study represented in Figure 5, which emphasizes
the role of Dadiff. Figure 5a depicts a reaction-limited regime (Dadiff ≪ 1) subject to diffusion-
dominated transport (Pe ≪ 1). In this case, dissolution is relatively slow, leading to solute
release throughout the domain. However, since diffusion is the dominant transport process, the
embedded solid inclusions dissolve rather uniformly. Figure 5b considers a diffusion-limited
regime (Dadiff > 1) with low flow (Pe ≪1). Reaction rates are faster than diffusion rates and
one can see that dissolution reactions occur locally, leading to a steep concentration front. In
Figure 5c, (Pe and Dadiff > 1), front instabilities are developed due to the advection dominated
transport regime. Min et al. (2016) also simulated the evolution of permeability. The case
depicted in Figure 5a corresponds to the largest increase in permeability, while the scenario
shown in Figure 5b leads to the lowest increase in permeability.
     The complexity of the dissolution regimes reported by Fredd et al. (2000) and Min et al.
(2016) demonstrates that a quantitative assessment of dissolution patterns and rates, and feedback
on porosity and permeability is difficult solely based on theoretical considerations. To properly
take pore scale processes into account, pore-scale simulations of processes for relevant pore
geometries provides a sensible path forward for deriving upscaled relationships for continuum
scale modeling of evolving porous media. Recent developments in imaging and pore-scale
modeling methods have made it possible to investigate these phenomena in more depth (Pereira
Nunes et al. 2016; Soulaine and Tchelepi 2016; Tian and Wang 2018). Gao et al. (2017) and
Gray et al. (2018) were able to approximately reproduce the experimentally observed dissolution
patterns in microstructures obtained from CT scan images. Pre-and post-experimental X-ray
         a)                                 b)                                   c)
         1000 s                             500 s                                50 s
  200


   100


    0
  200 30000 s                               5000 s                               200 s



   100


    0
      80000 s                               30000 s                              1000 s
  200


   100


   y0
         0            200             400 0               200               400 0              200            400
         x                                       0.2    0.4     0.6   0.8
 Figure 5. Mineral dissolution in a complex structure with randomly distributed insoluble material as a function of
 Peclet number and diffusive Damköhler number. a) slow reaction and slow flow, b) fast reaction and slow flow, c)
 fast reaction and fast flow. [Reproduced form T Min et al. (2016) Changes in porosity, permeability and surface area
 during rock dissolution: Effects of mineralogical heterogeneity. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer
 103:900-913 with permission of Elsevier. Copyright 2016.]
208                                        Seigneur et al.

synchrotron imaging of reactions in a fracture developed in Duperow Dolomite quantified the
wormholing taking place due to the influx of acidic fluid, and this effect was captured in both
reduced dimension models (Deng et al. 2016) and in pore scale models (Steefel et al. 2013).
Mineral precipitation
     The precipitation of secondary minerals often impacts groundwater flow and solute
transport. In some cases, precipitation reactions lead to the self-sealing of fractures (Steefel
and Lasaga 1994; Dobson et al. 2003b; MacQuarrie and Mayer, 2005; Gherardi et al. 2007) or
the reinforcement of the solid structure (Bickmore et al. 2001; Pfingsten 2002; Jacquemet et al.
2012). Similarly, carbonation of cementitious materials under water can lead to a calcite crust
forming on the surface of the material (Dauzères et al. 2010; Seigneur et al. 2017), making the
material almost impermeable. Crust formation has also been observed as a result of gypsum
precipitation on historical monuments (Dewanckele et al. 2012). Furthermore, permeability
decrease in sedimentary basins (Aharonov et al. 2004) or soils (White et al. 2005) due to
mineral precipitation have been observed. The formation of secondary minerals may lead to
fractures through generated internal mechanical stresses. This can lead to the deterioration
of mechanical properties (Chagneau et al. 2015; Li et al. 2017). For cement materials, the
delayed formation of ettringite (Taylor et al. 2001) or atmospheric carbonation (Auroy et al.
2013) are typical examples of precipitation processes that can induce fracturing, which can be
detrimental in the context of CO2 sequestration or radioactive waste management. In all the
aforementioned cases, precipitation can lead to clogging, which significantly affects flow and
solute transport. It is therefore important to understand the role of precipitation reactions on
transport properties and to consider these evolving parameters in modeling analyses.
      Kang et al. (2005) performed numerical studies of precipitation reactions involved in CO2
sequestration. Working with 2D simplified images, they studied the influence of Pe and the Dadiff
number on mineral precipitation reactions and subsequent permeability reduction. For a fixed high
Pe, these simulations indicate that Dadiff controls the time required to plug the medium. Larger
Dadiff lead to more localized precipitation near the inlet and more efficient clogging, reducing
permeability to zero. Conversely, increasing Pe (for a fixed Dadiff) has the opposite effect. The
efficient clogging of the medium relies on moderate Dadiff numbers and small Pe numbers. A small
amount of precipitates can render the pore structure impermeable. For higher Pe, it takes more
time (and more reactants) to clog the porous medium, as the precipitation front is wider.
      Tartakovsky et al. (2007) performed a similar study and obtained comparable results, which are
depicted in Figure 6. A high Pe number combined with a low Dadiff number resulted in precipitation
throughout the porous medium (Fig. 6a). For high Pe and increased Dadiff, precipitation mostly
occurred in the main flow pathways (“dendrite-like precipitation” depicted in Fig. 6b). In the case
of low Pe and high Dadiff, most of the precipitation took place near the inlet, rapidly clogging the
medium, leading to a rapid and sharp decrease of flowrates, as depicted in Figure 6c. Tartakovsky
et al. (2008) obtained similar results for mixing-induced precipitation involving different solutes.
For high Dadiff, the precipitation zone is thin, restricted to the region where both reactants meet. For
lower Dadiff, as diffusion is more dominant, the precipitation zone is widened.
     These examples emphasize the complex interactions between transport and reaction
processes and relations between their time scales. Even if the total amount of precipitates is
correctly captured, it is not straightforward to predict the evolution of transport parameters,
which depend strongly on the distribution of the precipitates and not only their amount,
especially in clogging situations.
     While wormholing dissolution patterns tend to exert a positive feedback loop in terms of
permeability enhancement, precipitation reactions can have the opposite effect by preferentially
occurring in the high-flow zones (Steefel and Lasaga 1994; Aharonov et al. 1998; Mehmani et
al. 2012), causing flow to diverge towards zones of lower permeability. This behavior can be
described as a “dewormholing” process.
                        Reactive Transport in Evolving Porous Media                                        209

                 a)                        b)                         c)
            60


            40
                                                                                                 C/Co
                                                                                                 1
            20                                                                                   0.8
                                                                                                 0.6
                                                                                                 0.4
                                                                                                 0.2
             0                                                                                   0


            60

                                                                                                 V/q
            40                                                                                   7
                                                                                                 6
                                                                                                 5
            20                                                                                   4
                                                                                                 3
                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                 1
          y 0                                                                                    0
                 0     20     40     60   0      20      40     60    0     20     40      60
                 x      t = 480                   t = 3720                  t = 19680
 Figure 6. Distribution of precipitation, velocity and concentrations. Light gray particles represent primary
 mineral grains, black particles represent precipitated minerals. The grey scale in the upper panels denotes
 normalized concentrations C/Co at 3 different output times (dimensionless model units), the bottom panels
 show normalized velocities at 3 times [Reproduced from Tartakovsky et al. (2007) A smoothed particle hy-
 drodynamics model for reactive transport and mineral precipitation in porous and fractured porous media. Water
 Resour Res 43:W05437 with permission from John Wiley & Sons.]

     However, other factors can also affect the location and distribution of precipitate formation.
Rajyaguru et al. (2019) studied through-diffusion in chalk samples. Precipitation of barite and
gypsum were investigated under a purely diffusive regime. Gypsum is characterized by a rather
high solubility and kinetic rate compared to barite. It was observed through micro-CT analysis
that the precipitation patterns were significantly different for barite and gypsum. While barite
precipitated as a thin continuous disk at the center of the chalk sample (even though its intrinsic rate
is lower), gypsum mostly precipitated as large isolated spheres. Even though the overall porosity
decrease was similar (~2%), the diffusive properties were more substantially impacted in the barite
experiment. The authors suggest that the barite precipitation was the result of both homogeneous
and heterogeneous nucleation. Conversely, the heterogeneous precipitation of gypsum seemed to
have been highly influenced by local pore structure heterogeneities. These experiments reveal the
complexity of mineral precipitation within pore structures, even in simple diffusion-controlled
transport regimes. Chagneau et al. (2015) showed that precipitation of celestite in a diffusion-
reaction cell occurred almost exclusively in macropores based on the differential transport of
anions (excluded from the smallest pores due to electrostatic effects) and cations.
     Other studies also showed the importance of spatial heterogeneities for determining the
distribution of precipitation, which in turn will control the evolution of tortuosity, permeability
and reactivity of porous media (Andreani et al. 2009; Fox et al. 2016; Garcia-Rios et al. 2017).


                       INTEGRATED ASSESSMENT OF THE IMPACT
                      OF MINERAL REACTIONS ON POROUS MEDIA
     In many situations, mineral precipitation reactions occur in tandem or in response to
dissolution reactions, leading to feedback between these reactions. Singurindy and Berkowitz
(2003) provided images of the coupled dissolution/precipitation of carbonate and gypsum
and showed how the dissolution patterns influenced the precipitation patterns. The evolution
of a porous medium at the grain scale subject to dissolution and precipitation reactions is
conceptually represented in two dimensions in Figure 7.
210                                         Seigneur et al.

 Initial Pore Structure                          Dissolution


               a                                                                     a Critical pore throat zone
                                             1
                                                       3
                                                                                     b Tortuous zone
       b
                                                        6                            c Large “disconnected” pores
                     c
                                                                                        Modification of percolation
                                                                                     1 pathways
                                        2                                            2 Modification of pore throat
                                                                                        Modification of reactive
           4                                                                         3 surface


                                                                     Precipitation
                                                                                     4 Porosity trapping

                                                                                     5 Surface passivation
                         5
                                                                                     6 Leached layer formation

 Figure 7. Schematic representation of the effect of dissolution–precipitation reactions on pore structure.
 Brown-colored grains depict primary phases, dashed red lines depict original grain size of dissolving pri-
 mary phases, grey colored rims depict incongruent dissolution and leached layer formation, green-colored
 coatings and grains depict secondary mineral phases.


     The initial pore structure depicted in Figure 7 (top left quadrant) exhibits several features.
The region surrounding point (a) is critical, as it is well connected, providing a main pathway
for water flow and solute migration. The region around point (b) represents a rather tortuous
pathway for diffusion and advection. The region around (c) on the other hand, consists of large
pores, which are poorly connected to the main transport pathways. Figure 7 also emphasizes
that modifications to a pore structure can have varied impacts on macroscopic properties.
     In a dissolution-dominated regime (top right quadrant of Fig. 7), dissolution of primary
minerals can lead to the creation of new flow and transport pathways (1) or increase the size
of critical pore throats (2). This evolution can have significant impacts on flow and transport
processes. In addition, dissolution will impact the reactive surface of the initial solid structure
(3) or can lead to the formation of leached layers in the case of incongruent dissolution (6).
     In a precipitation-dominated regime (bottom left quadrant of Fig. 7), precipitation of
secondary minerals can have opposite effects: decline of connectivity, leading to a reduction
of flow and transport pathways (1), decrease of critical pore size (2), trapping of initially
connected porosity (4). In addition, precipitation reactions can limit access to (4) or passivate
(5) a fraction of the initial reactive surface.
    In a regime that is both affected by dissolution and precipitation (depicted in the lower right
quadrant of Fig. 7), coupled dissolution–precipitation reaction can lead to more complex effects.
Figure 7 clarifies that the modification of the pore structure depends on the respective dissolution
and precipitation kinetics and interactions between dissolution and precipitation reactions.
                       Reactive Transport in Evolving Porous Media                                211

                  RELATIONSHIPS FOR MODELING EVOLUTION
                     OF CONTINUUM-SCALE PARAMETERS
    Despite obvious challenges with the parameterization of evolving porous media,
simulation tools are needed at the continuum scale to assess a variety of relevant environment
and engineering problems. In the following, we provide a review of the most common
approaches found in the literature to parameterize evolving parameters for reactive transport
simulations at the continuum scale.
Evolution of porosity
     As discussed above, the dissolution and precipitation of minerals lead to changes in porosity.
From a modeling perspective, it is fairly straightforward to account for total porosity changes at
the continuum scale. At any point in time, the porosity can be calculated based on the mineral
volume fractions that constitute the grain matrix. In this context, porosity is defined as:
                                                      Nm
                                                1   i                                        (10)
                                                       i


     It must be kept in mind that porosity defines total porosity and does not take into
consideration the fraction of disconnected porosity, dead-end pores and effective porosity. In
many situations, the mineralogical composition of porous media is not well known and/or only
a few mineral phases contribute significantly to porosity changes. Under such conditions, it is
more practical to define porosity at a specific location in space and point in time as:
                                                           N m ,r
                                             1   NR   i                                    (11)
                                                             i

where φNR is the volume fraction occupied by non-reactive minerals and Nm, r is the number of reactive
minerals. Based on these considerations, the change in porosity can then be estimated as follows:

                                             d    N m ,r
                                                          d
                                                  i                                            (12)
                                             dt    i 1 dt


      Similar approaches can be taken to update effective porosity due to bioclogging, i.e., the
formation of biofilms. While the previous equation accurately describes the physical processes at
play, it does not provide any information about the structural evolution of the pore structure. Looking
back at the few referenced studies of the previous section, this obviously constitutes a shortcoming.
However, as we will discuss in the following sections, it is possible to attribute different continuum
relationships for the porous media properties, in order to represent indirectly the pore structure
evolution. This approach has been commonly used in reactive transport modeling and the evolving
porosity has been used to update transport parameters such as tortuosity and permeability.
Tortuosity and diffusivity as a function of porosity
     Relevance of purely diffusive regime. In the absence of significant advective fluxes
(e.g.: in low permeability materials, low hydraulic head gradients), diffusion is the main
driving process for solute transport. Diffusion-dominated transport is relevant for deep
geologic repositories for long-term storage of radioactive waste. In this context, reactive
transport modelling has been used to develop an improved understanding of the degradation
of cementitious materials at cement/clay interfaces (Gaucher and Blanc 2006; Savage 2013;
Jenni et al. 2017; Dauzères et al. 2019). Since these interfaces are affected by dissolution–
precipitation reactions that induce porosity changes, diffusion properties of the materials
are also affected, directly through changes of porosity, as well as through the evolution of
212                                      Seigneur et al.

tortuosity. Despite known limitations, it is therefore necessary to provide relationships able to
describe the evolution of tortuosity as a function of changes in porosity.
     Tortuosity–porosity relationships. A review of the literature reveals that many tortuosity–
porosity relationships exist to describe the dependence of diffusion on porosity. These relationships
have been developed to estimate effective diffusion coefficients based on porosity, a parameter that
is easier to measure than the effective diffusion coefficient. These relationships are also commonly
used in evolving porous media. Akanni et al. 1987; Boudreau 1996 and Ray et al. 2018 present
a summary of the commonly used relationships. However, most reactive transport simulations in
saturated porous media rely on Archie’s law to account for the porosity dependence of the pore
diffusion coefficient (Xie et al. 2015), which, in its simplest form can be written as:

                                                 l   n                                       (13)
with n being the cementation factor. Let us recall that, in this study, the effective diffusion
coefficient for a fully saturated aqueous phase is defined as:

                                              Dle  l Dl0                                     (14)

     Some confusion usually exists about these different relations. In some cases, studies relate
a relationship between porosity and effective diffusion coefficient, instead of tortuosity. Other
forms of Archie’s law can be found, some of them describing a percolation threshold under
which diffusion cannot occur (e.g., Bentz and Garboczi 1991 for cement materials). Another
example is the relation developed for the effective diffusion coefficient in the liquid phase by
Navarre-Sitchler et al. (2009), which will be further studied in a case study :

                                         Dle  Dlmin  Dl0 (e )2                               (15)
         min
where D represents the effective diffusion coefficient of the matrix, and where the effective
         l
porosity, fe, is defined as:

                                     e  a(  crit )n            crit                     (16)
                                        0                      crit

     Another commonly used tortuosity–porosity relationship assumes an exponential
relationship to porosity:

                                                    exp(a)
                                             l                                                (17)
                                                       
where a is an experimental fitting factor. Let us emphasize that these laws were usually
developed to link the effective diffusion coefficient to porosity.
     Under unsaturated conditions, it has been shown that tortuosity also depends on phase
saturation. A formulation that is commonly used to estimate porosity was derived by Millington
and Quirk (1961):

                                                S7 / 31/ 3                                 (18)

     This relationship, which shows a strong and non-linear dependency of tortuosity on phase
saturation Sα, was derived for the gas diffusion in porous media (Millington 1959). However,
most reactive transport codes adopt the Millington–Quirk relation (Millington and Quirk
1961) to model diffusion through the liquid phase as well. Considering the opposite wetting
behavior of the gas and liquid phase, the use of similar relations to describe tortuosity in
                                  Reactive Transport in Evolving Porous Media                                                    213

      100




     10−1




     10−2
                                                                                  Figure 8. Graphical representation of common tor-
τl




                                                    Archie (n = 0.5)
                                                     Archie (n = 1)
                                                                                  tuosity–porosity relationships of the liquid phase.
                                                     Archie (n = 2)
     10−3                                        Mainguy et al. (2000)
                                                 Seigneur et al. (2017)
                                               Bentz and Garboczi (1991)
                                                    Maxwell (1881)
                                             Tomadakis and Sotirchos (1993)
     10−4
                                                    Peterson (1958)

            0   0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4     0.5 0.6     0.7    0.8     0.9      1
                                        porosity



these different phases remains questionable. Chou et al. 2012 provides a review of different
tortuosity models for unsaturated conditions and concludes that the use of the Millington–
Quirk relation overestimates experimental data.
     Figure 8 depicts tortuosity as a function of porosity based on common relationships for
saturated media, some of which are documented in the literature (Maxwell 1881; Petersen
1958; Tomadakis and Sotirchos 1993), while others are variations of Archie’s law (Bentz
and Garboczi 1991) or represent an exponential dependence on porosity (Mainguy et al.
2000; Seigneur et al. 2017). It can be observed that tortuosities obtained from the various
relationships differ substantially, in particular for low porosities. The range between minimum
and maximum tortuosities are approximately 2 orders of magnitude for a porosity of 0.5,
while calculated tortuosities differ by more than 5 orders of magnitude for porosities less than
0.1. These pronounced differences suggest that tortuosity–porosity relationships are specific
to porous media. The fact that some relationships do not yield a tortuosity of “zero” for a
porosity of “zero” (even though the effective diffusion coefficient does go to 0) implies that
these relationships are not applicable for conditions of complete pore clogging. However,
there is experimental evidence that in some cases mineral precipitation will not completely
clog the porous media. Li and co-workers observed that despite the formation of a distinct
calcite cement band in cement subject to CO2 attack, the porosity did not go completely to
zero as evidenced by the continued progress of the primary portlandite dissolution front (Li
et al. 2017). They attributed this to be due to either the lack of precipitation in nanopores
that were still able to allow for diffusive transport of the uncharged H2CO3 molecule into the
unaltered cement, or alternatively due to continued micro-fracturing. The lack of clogging of
the nanopores is compatible with the interpretation of anion (and cation) transport in clay-rich
material in which anion exclusion occurs (Chagneau et al. 2015).
      Application to reactive transport modelling. Leaching of cementitious materials has been
studied extensively, since dissolution reactions lead to increased diffusion into these materials,
enhancing their deterioration. The prediction of degradation depths of these materials strongly
depends on which cementation (or exponential) factor (Shao et al. 2013) or which feedback law is
considered (Seigneur et al. 2017; Georget et al. 2018). This is due to the fact that dissolution rates
of primary minerals are affected by the diffusion of calcium through the degraded layers. Several
reactive transport studies managed to adequately reproduce the extent of measured degradation
depths using either Archie’s law (Galíndez et al. 2006; De Windt and Badreddine, 2007; Chagneau et
al. 2015; Li et al. 2017; Georget et al. 2018) or an exponential relation (Mainguy et al. 2000; Seigneur
et al. 2017) to describe tortuosity evolution as a function of changing porosity. However, the choice
214                                        Seigneur et al.

of the cementation factor n or the exponential factor a differs between the studies in a way that is not
straightforward to predict, depending on the conditions and the materials considered.
     Most of these modelling studies are based on an initial porosity and tortuosity representative
for the investigated materials, and only use these empirical laws to compute the evolution of
diffusion parameters. In these studies, the initial diffusive properties of the material are either
known independently or were fitted to early time data. Since dissolution under a diffusion-
controlled regime occurs in a fairly uniform manner and leads to a relatively mild increase
in tortuosity, this approach was able to produce reasonable matches with observational data,
albeit with different fitting factors.
     However, when precipitation reactions occur simultaneously, it becomes more complicated
to assess the relative dynamics between dissolution and precipitation reactions and their
effect on tortuosity and diffusion properties. Several studies had to artificially increase the
empirical factors when describing precipitation reactions (Huet et al. 2010; Brunet et al. 2013;
Chagneau et al. 2015; Lalan 2016) or the reactivity (Jacquemet et al. 2012), or use other
empirical assumptions (Walsh et al. 2013) to be able to reproduce breakthrough curves and/or
degradation depths when simulating the carbonation of these materials.
     These results are consistent with pore scale analyses (see above), implying that limited
and localized mineral precipitation can significantly alter diffusive migration paths. Hence, the
impact of precipitation reactions on diffusion is more difficult to assess than that of dissolution.
These observations also imply that different materials are affected in distinctive ways, which
is inherently related to the initial organization of their pore structure. Materials with a high
degree of initial tortuosity, containing small pore throats, will be more sensitive to the effects of
precipitation reactions, which was observed both experimentally and in numerical modelling
studies (Kutchko et al. 2007; Brunet et al. 2013; Huber et al. 2014; Seigneur et al. 2017).
     These results suggest that it might be necessary to use different tortuosity–porosity
relationships for materials affected by dissolution or precipitation reactions. However, since
these reactions are most commonly coupled and occur simultaneously, a proper assessment of
the effects of these reactions on diffusivity remains a challenging issue.
      Moreover, previous studies have shown that obtaining a better representation for the
evolution of diffusion (sometimes through the use of unrealistic high cementation factors) can
make it difficult to reproduce observed mineral precipitation and dissolution patterns. Jacquemet
et al. 2012 indicated that the evolution of reactivity also plays a role in the degradation depth,
although most of the research to date has focused on the evolution of the transport properties.
Permeability as a function of porosity
      Relevance. Permeability and its evolution plays a significant role in advection-driven transport
regimes, including the injection of fluids in disequilibrium with the surrounding rock formation
(acidizing carbonate rocks or uranium recovery via sulfuric acid leaching). In these regimes, the
modification of porosity can also impact permeability, and therefore groundwater flow patterns, and
in turn the degree of chemical perturbations which alter the porous medium. It is therefore necessary
to utilize relationships capable of capturing the impact of evolving porosity on permeability.
     Review of Kozeny–Carman and power-laws relations. Like relationships between
tortuosity and porosity, permeability–porosity relationships have been developed independently
from the field of reactive transport modeling. The Kozeny–Carman relationship is the
most commonly used permeability–porosity relationship in reactive transport simulations
(Poonoosamy et al. 2018) for simulating the evolution of permeability affected by mineral
dissolution–precipitation reactions. It is commonly used in the following form:

                                                     3 (1  0 )2
                                         k  k0                                                    (19)
                                                  (1  )2  30
                          Reactive Transport in Evolving Porous Media                                                                         215

where k0 and f0 respectively represent the initial or reference permeability and porosity. Xu
and Yu (2008) and Hommel et al. (2018) provide an extensive review of the most common
permeability–porosity relationships. In general, power-laws as a function of porosity have
been widely used to describe the evolution of permeability:
                                                                                  n
                                                                                                                                           (20)
                                                              k  k0  
                                                                      0 
As an alternative, Verma and Pruess (1988) have introduced a critical porosity ϕcrit in the power law:
                                                                                      n
                                                                   crit                                                                  (21)
                                                         k  k0             
                                                                 0  crit 
which corresponds to the porosity for which permeability becomes zero. The parameter
n represents an empirical fitting parameter, and could be considered as similar in concept to
thresholds for diffusion found in modifications of Archie’s Law (Bentz and Garboczi 1992;
Navarre-Sitchler et al. 2009). Values between 3 and 75 have been reported for the fitting parameter
n (Brunet et al. 2013). Gouze and Luquot (2011) suggested that this wide range of power values
can be explained by the fact that permeability is controlled by two parameters: the first parameter
corresponds to the tortuosity of the pore space. The second parameter corresponds to the pore
throat size, or the “hydraulic radius” (Knackstedt and Zhang 1994; Moreira and Coury 2004)
representing the characteristic radius of the pore channels. Mercury intrusion porosimetry and
the “ink-bottle effect” (Diamond 2000) provide useful experimental illustrations of the pore-
throat size control on permeability. During the first stages of wormhole development, an increase
of hydraulic radii occurs, while when channeling develops, tortuosity (as defined in this chapter)
increases significantly. In more general terms, Hao et al. (2013) and Menke et al. (2016) suggest
that the power value is representative of the heterogeneity of the pore structure.
     Figure 9a depicts the common permeability–porosity relationships for an arbitrary
reference porosity of 0.3. Similar to the dependence of tortuosity on porosity, it can be
observed that the various relationships lead to widely differing results. A porosity increase,
representing the case of mineral dissolution, leads to differences on the order of one order of
magnitude between the relationships for a porosity enhancement of 0.3. On the other hand,
much more significant differences are seen for the case of precipitation and porosity reduction.


                    a)                                                           b)
                                                                            2
              102

              101

              100                                                          1.5

             10−1

             10−2                                                           1
                                                                      k0
                                                                      k
        k0
        k




             10−3                           Kozeny-Carman
                                                                                                           Algive et al. (2012)
                                     Verma and Pruess (1988), n = 2
             10−4                                                          0.5                       Algive et al. (2012) high Dadiff
                                     Verma and Pruess (1988), n = 4
                                                                                                     Algive et al. (2012) low Dadiff
             10−5                           Power law, n=2
                                            Power law, n=3                                            Hubert et al. (2013), Pe = 1
                                            Power law, n=4                                           Hubert et al. (2013), Pe = 0.01
             10−6
                                                                            0
                    −0.3 −0.2 −0.1      0      0.1     0.2     0.3          0.9           0.95          1            1.05               1.1
                           porosity evolution (φ − φ0 )                                     porosity evolution ( φφ0 )


 Figure 9. (a) Graphical representation of common permeability–porosity relationships. The reference po-
 rosity f0 was arbitrarily set to 0.3, (b) Permeability dependence on porosity based on pore network model
 simulations by Algive et al. (2012) and Huber et al. (2014). Presented results of Huber et al. (2014) cor-
 respond to a Dadiff of 1, and an initial porosity of 0.3 was assumed.
216                                      Seigneur et al.

 It is worth pointing out that in certain cases, inverse correlations were found between permeability
and porosity (Luquot et al. 2013, 2016; Garing et al. 2015). Such correlations usually arise when
coupled dissolution and precipitation processes are occurring at the same time, but do not involve
the same pore sizes (Luquot et al. 2014; Garing et al. 2015). None of the permeability–porosity
relationships introduced above could represent these inverse relationships.

    Applicability of power laws relations for porosity–permeability feedbacks. The
evolution of permeability is more difficult to capture than the evolution of diffusivity. Indeed,
in diffusion-dominated regimes, reaction fronts tend to be rather stable. Conversely, in
advection-dominated regimes, pore-scale heterogeneities affect the distribution of flowrates
and can induce unstable fronts and channeling.
     Power laws are often used to describe permeability–porosity relationships. These
relationships strongly depend on the initial material’s pore structure and its heterogeneity
(Rötting et al. 2015; Menke et al. 2016; Wolterbeek and Raoof 2018). Civan (2001) uses three
different power laws to describe Fontainebleau sandstones that are similar in nature but have
different initial porosities.
     It has also been shown that the fitting parameter n depends on the Pe and Da numbers,
since they influence the dissolution and precipitation patterns (Fig. 9b). Egermann et al. (2010)
showed that the permeability evolution in five different dissolution experiments was well
represented by power laws; however, each required a different fitting parameter. The values
of the power increased from 0.5 (relatively uniform dissolution of grains) to 31 (dissolution
focused on pore throats). Colón et al. (2004); Panga et al. (2005); Menke et al. (2016) provide
additional examples with similar outcomes.
      In addition, Smith et al. (2013) observed that the value of the fitting parameter n evolved
with time as dissolution progressed. This was likely due to variations in heterogeneity caused
by dissolution reactions in advective regimes. In other words, a constant fitting parameter n
might not be suitable to describe the evolution for substantial modifications of porosity (Pape
et al. 1998; Bernabé et al. 2003; Nogues et al. 2013; Ovaysi and Piri 2014; Vialle et al. 2014).
      Considering that mineral dissolution reactions can lead to wormhole formations and
precipitation reactions can lead to the closure of wormholes and fractures, the form of permeability–
porosity relationships are typically different for precipitation and dissolution reactions (Bernabé
et al. 2003; Li et al. 2010), as shown in Figure 9b. Furthermore, in cases of coupled dissolution
and precipitation or dissolution–precipitation cycles, hysteresis was observed in the permeability–
porosity curves (Algive et al. 2012; De Boever et al. 2012; Van der Land et al. 2013), whose
importance depends on the Pe and Da numbers (Algive et al. 2012). In general, hysteresis is
limited in the case of diffusion-dominated regimes with low kinetic rates (low Pe and high Dadiff),
consistent with expected behavior, as discussed above in the section “Effect of mineral dissolution
and precipitation on porous media” (Tartakovsky et al. 2008; Min et al. 2016).
     These considerations explain why the permeability–porosity relationships have limited
predictive capabilities in the context of evolving porous media. Indeed, for identical pore
structure and otherwise identical conditions, considering diverse minerals with different
kinetic rates (i.e., different Da numbers), experimental data can only be reproduced with
different fitting parameters n. It seems unlikely that a single model, however complex, could
predict changes in permeability in evolving porous media under different flow and transport
conditions. These observations emphasize the need to choose an appropriate power-value,
based on a priori knowledge or constrained by observational data.
     Cubic law for porosity–permeability in fractures. In fractures, it is customary to use
the cubic law for permeability, which is related to the local fracture aperture (and thus, local
fracture porosity). This relation has a long history in the literature, with the most cited in the
geosciences being perhaps the study by Witherspoon et al. (1980). Generalization to a local
                      Reactive Transport in Evolving Porous Media                               217

cubic law for rough fractures was discussed by Oron and Berkowitz (1998). The interested
reader is referred to the chapter by Deng and Spycher (2019, this volume) for further discussion.
Evolving reactivity
    In addition to the evolution of transport parameters, it is equally important to describe
the evolution of reaction rates, i.e., the reactivity in evolving porous media. An adequate
description of rates is necessary to capture long-term solute concentrations and loadings, pH-
buffer reactions, and to adequately account for feedback with flow and transport processes.
     Evolution of reactivity during mineral dissolution. Reactivity is often described via
a reactive surface area of the minerals. Several models are commonly used to describe the
evolution of the surface area S. The simplest formulation considers the uniform dissolution of
spherical grains, in which case the surface area is inversely proportional to its radius:

                                                     3                                        (22)
                                                S∝
                                                     R
Based on this dependence, a two-third power law relationship can be derived to describe the
evolution of surface area with respect to a mineral’s volume fraction (Steefel and Lichtner 1998):
                                                            2 /3
                                                                                             (23)
                                            S  S0  
                                                    0 
where S0 is a reference surface area and φ0 defines the corresponding reference mineral volume
fraction. This relationship is commonly used to describe surface controlled mineral dissolution
reactions, accounting for a decrease in rate as dissolution proceeds (Fig. 10). Although this
relationship is derived based on the dissolution of a single grain, it has been used frequently
on the continuum scale in the form of Equation (23) (Steefel and Lichtner 1998). A decline
in reactivity and surface area is intuitive; however, it does not hold under all circumstances.
Dissolution reactions can also lead to an increase of reactive surface area, as illustrated by the
sugar-lump model developed by Noiriel et al. (2009). Similarly, the formation of etch pits on the
mineral surface may also lead to an increase in reactive surface area, although the reactive surface
area (like the mineral volume fraction) must ultimately go to zero with continued dissolution.
     Luquot and Gouze (2009) proposed a power-law relationship to describe the evolution of
surface area as a function of porosity:
                                                            w
                                                                                             (24)
                                            S  S0  
                                                    0 
This approach allowed Luhmann et al. (2014) to fit the decrease of reactivity as evidenced by
decreasing concentrations in the breakthrough curves of their experiments.
     However, surface reactions are also affected by pore scale flow dynamics. Li et al. (2008)
considered the role of a diffusion boundary layer in the dissolution of calcite within a single
cylindrical pore. Noiriel et al. (2012) also considered the role of a diffusion-controlled boundary
layer on mineral dissolution rates, an effect that is expected in all but the most vigorously stirred
system. Molins et al. (2014) performed pore-scale simulation of the injection of CO2 into
crushed calcite. While only a small amount of calcite dissolved in these simulations (porosity
variation negligible), the results showed that mass transport limitation to the reactive surface
also result in an important control on mineral dissolution. These conclusions were reinforced
by a recent pore scale study on flow and transport in discrete reactive fractures (Molins et al.
2019). The shrinking sphere model depicted in Figure 10 assumes that concentrations in the
bulk solution and in water directly in contact with the mineral surface are fully mixed and
identical, which constitutes a simplification of the processes at work.
218                                                               Seigneur et al.

     Minerals often do not undergo complete dissolution, but dissolve incongruently. Such
dissolution reactions have been described by the shrinking core model (Levenspiel 1998), as
depicted in Figure 11, in particular with applications to sulfide mineral oxidation (Ritchie 1994;
Wunderly et al. 1996; Lefebvre et al. 2001; Mayer et al. 2002). In the case of sulfide oxidation, the
rate-determining step is the diffusion of dissolved oxygen towards the mineral surface through
a leached (oxidized) layer. As sulfide oxidation progresses, the thickness of the leached layer
grows, and continued oxidative dissolution slows substantially, leading to a negative feedback
on the grain scale. This model is not restricted to sulfide mineral oxidation, it can be applied
to different minerals, also subject to incongruent dissolution and leached layer formation, or
composite mineral grains, representing conditions when reactants diffuse through the porous
leached layer generated by the dissolution of one of the minerals present in the grain (Steefel and
Lichtner 1994, 1998; Deng et al. 2016). The shrinking core model can also be used to represent
the effect of the formation of surface coatings associated with the precipitation of secondary
minerals. In general, these considerations emphasize the mass transport limitations can affect
reactivity and can significantly decrease the reaction rates (Dentz et al. 2011).
     Assuming spherical particles, an effective first order rate constant capturing the effect of
the formation of a leached layer or surface coating can be described as:

                                                                                      ri p                                         (25)
                                                                  kim  Die,m
                                                                                  (ri  rir )rir
                                                                                     p


where Die,m represents the effective diffusion coefficient of the species driving mineral dissolution
                                         p                                           r
through the protective surface layer, ri is the initial radius of the particle and ri is the radius of

      particle surface                                      particle surface
             =                                                     =
      reactive surface                                      reactive surface
                                        bulk fluid


                                        stagnant
                                        water film

                                                                                     Figure 10. Schematic representation of the shrink-
                                    unreacted portion                                ing sphere model: the surface area and the volume
                                       of mineral                                    fraction are related by a two-third power law.
                                                          reactant      product
    reactant       product                                species       species
    species        species


      reaction on mineral surface

      micro-scale transport through stagnant water film


    particle surface                                 particle surface
           =
    reactive surface                                         reactive surface
                                    bulk fluid

                                    stagnant
                                    water film

                              leached layer,                                        Figure 11. Schematic representation of the
                             alteration rim or                                      shrinking core model for transport-controlled re-
                             surface coating
                                                                                    actions when an altered layer develops through an
                             unreacted portion                                      incongruent dissolution reaction.
                                of mineral
  reactant      product                                reactant      product
  species       species                                species       species

    reaction on mineral surface

    micro-scale transport through stagnant water film
    micro-scale transport through protective coating
                                                            Reactive Transport in Evolving Porous Media                                                   219

   the unreacted portion of the particle. Although the shrinking core model is derived for a single
   particle, this formulation makes it possible to extend its application to the continuum scale.
         The application of the shrinking core model was shown to capture experimental observations
   when applied to the weathering of mine wastes (Wunderly et al. 1996; Brookfield et al. 2006; Demers
   et al. 2013; Soleimani et al. 2013; Doulati Ardejani et al. 2014; Smith et al. 2018), leaching of ore
   minerals (Ferrier et al. 2016), and for thermochemical sulfate reduction (Bildstein et al. 2001).
         Although practical, the shrinking core model has several drawbacks: its formulation commonly
   does not account for a local mass balance during incongruent dissolution and is normally not
   accounting for the elements that are left behind in the leached layer and the elements that are
   released into the bulk solution. In addition, the formulation requires assumption of an initial leached
   layer thickness, which further adds to the empiricism of the model. An alternative approach would
   be to develop a formulation that is able to account for transition from surface-controlled dissolution
   to diffusion- (transport-) controlled dissolution (Fig. 12). However, such a formulation adds
   additional complications. For surface-controlled reactions at the continuum scale, it is commonly
   assumed that dissolved species concentrations on the reactive mineral surface are identical to
   species concentrations in the bulk solution (Fig. 12a), while for the shrinking core model, it is
   assumed that the species driving the dissolution of the mineral is consumed instantaneously when
   arriving at the mineral surface (Fig. 12c). However, for a transition regime, the concentration of the
   species driving the dissolution of the mineral at the reactive surface is unknown (Fig. 12b). Due to
   this additional complexity, this formulation has not been further developed to date.
         Evolution of reactivity during mineral precipitation. The formation of secondary minerals
   may also affect the reactivity of primary mineral phases and their dissolution rates. The precipitation
   of these secondary phases on the surface of primary minerals can lead to surface passivation
   (e.g., Harrison et al. 2016) induced by heterogeneous nucleation (e.g., precipitation of carbonate
   minerals in permeable reactive barriers, precipitation of hydrated Mg-carbonates during carbon
   sequestration, precipitation of Fe and Mn oxides). Surface passivation is not straightforward to take
   into account, due to complex surface morphology of secondary phases and limited availability of
   data. Conceptually, the reactivity of primary mineral phases can be linked to the volume fraction
   of secondary precipitates. Jeen et al. (2007) used an exponential formulation to describe evolving
   reactivity of iron within a permeable reactive barrier as a decline in reactive surface area:

                                                                                               S  S0 exp( a p )                                        (26)
   where φp represents the total volume fraction of precipitated secondary carbonate minerals.
   Jeen et al. (2007) showed a significantly better agreement with observed data using the surface
   passivation model than for using a two-third power law formulation (Eqn. 22). Similarly,
   Harrison et al. (2016) described the surface passivation using a volume-fraction threshold

                     a)                               b)                          c)
                            surface control           surface & transport          transport control
                                                            control



                                                   time                        time
                                                                                                            Figure 12. Concept of transitioning from sur-
                                                                                                            face-controlled mineral dissolution to transport-
concentration of reactant




                                                                                                            controlled conditions (shrinking core model). Cb
                                                                                                            and Cr respectively refer to the concentration of
                                                                                                            the reactant in the bulk solution and at the reac-
                              Cr ≈ Cb                                                                       tive surface.

                                                             Cb> Cr> 0                Cr ≈ 0
                                              rp                       rr rp                     rr    rp
                                                          radial position
220                                                                              Seigneur et al.

model, implying that dissolution rates approached effectively zero above a threshold volume
fraction for secondary precipitates. Also, Daval et al. (2009) described the passivation of
wollastonite dissolution by the observed precipitation of calcite, by modeling a linear decrease
in surface area with respect to calcite volume fraction.
     Noiriel et al. (2012) studied the evolution of surface area during carbonate precipitation,
based on imaging techniques, BET analysis and a micro-continuum model. The main conclusions
were that the local increase in surface area arising from mineral precipitation had a significant
impact on the integrated mineral concentrations and the breakthrough curves. Modelling the
experiments with a constant surface area corresponding to the measured initial value failed to
represent the observed data, indicating the necessity of taking into account the evolution of
surface area during precipitation processes (Fig. 13). As discussed in more detail below (see
case study by Beckingham et al. 2016, 2017), mineralogical heterogeneity and the evolution of
reactive surface area can also substantially affect overall rock reactivity and solute release.


                              10
                                                      experimental data
calcite volume fraction (%)




                                           simulation (constant initial surface area
                               8
                                             simulation (increased surface area)            Figure 13. Reactive transport modeling of the accumula-
                                                                                            tion of calcite in a capillary tube. Injection of calcite su-
                               6                                                            persaturated solution results in precipitation of calcite on
                                                                                            calcite seeds. In order to match the volume % calcite re-
                               4
                                                                                            corded by X-ray microtomography, it was necessary to use
                                                                                            a higher specific surface area for neoformed calcite than
                               2
                                                                                            was measured for the initial calcite grains in the capillary
                               0
                                                                                            tube (reproduced from Noiriel et al. 2012)
                                   0   2      4         6       8          10          12
                                                  distance (mm)



CASE STUDIES OF REACTIVE TRANSPORT IN EVOLVING POROUS MEDIA
     In the following, three case studies are presented covering the three main aspects of
evolving porous media covered in this chapter, namely evolving permeability, diffusivity and
reactivity. The first case study by Poonoosamy et al. (2015, 2016) focuses on permeability
evolution in response to mineral-dissolution precipitation reactions. The second case study by
Navarre-Sitchler et al. (2009) evaluates the effect of weathering on diffusivity on the pore scale
and the continuum scale, while the third case study by Beckingham et al. (2016, 2017) focuses
on the progress and evolution of mineral dissolution reactions in a heterogeneous rock matrix.
These three case studies have provided successful comparison between experimental data and
continuum approaches, incorporating details from pore-scale observations.
Effects of coupled dissolution–precipitation reactions on permeability and flow pattern
     The experimental and modeling study by Poonoosamy et al. (2015, 2016) provides an
example on the effect of coupled mineral dissolution–precipitation reactions, leading to a
localized decrease of porosity with observable effects on flow and solute transport.
     The 2D experimental setup, depicted in Figure 14, considers a layered porous medium
composed on non-reactive quartz sand in which a reactive layer of celestite (SrSO4), composed
of two different particle sizes, was embedded. A concentrated solution of barium chloride was
injected at a constant rate (100 µL/min) at the bottom left corner of the experimental reactor
to induce celestite dissolution and barite precipitation (BaSO4), associated with a porosity
decrease. The effect of the porosity decrease on permeability was assessed by measuring fluid
pressure upgradient and downgradient of the celestite layer over time.
                                            Reactive Transport in Evolving Porous Media                                                                                              221

                           Non-reactive                                  Non-reactive
                           Quartz (SiO2)                                 Quartz (SiO2)
                                                                                                                    Outlet

                                                                                                                              Figure 14. Schematic representation of the ex-
                                                                                                                              perimental setup by Poonoosamy et al. (2015). The




                                             Celestite (SrSO4)
                                                                                                                              10 cm × 10 cm domain contains non-reactive quartz
                                                                                                                              near the inflow and outflow ports. Sandwiched in be-
                 10 cm




                                                                                                                              tween is a reactive celestite layer. For reactive transport
                                                                                                                              modeling, the celestite layer was subdivided into two
                                                                                                                              regions containing a thin layer of finer grained material
                                                                                                                              and a thicker layer of coarser-grained material.
 Inlet (BaCl2)


                                            10 cm



      Tracer tests were performed before and after completion of the experiment and showed
significant discrepancies due to the porosity evolution of the reactive material (not shown).
Barite precipitation was recorded throughout the reactive zones, with an enrichment near the
left interface between the quartz sand and the region containing fine-grained celestite (Fig. 15a).
High resolution μXRF imaging presented in Poonoosamy et al. (2016) provided insights into the
dynamics of the dissolution/precipitation reactions. Dissolution of the small celestite grains was
rapid and barite precipitation locally filled the open pore space. Larger celestite grains; however,
were passivated by barite precipitation on the surface (Fig. 15b). Image analysis showed that
barite precipitation led to partial surface passivation of the celestite grains as well as cementation
of the solid matrix, disconnecting initially connected pores (Fig. 15b).

             a)                                                                                                                b)
                                                                                   barite concentration (mol/dm³)




                                                                                                                         12
                                                                                                                                                                          Sr
                                                                 200 hours
                                100 hours
             10 hours




                                                                                                                         8

                                                                                                                                                                          Ba
                                                                                                                         4



                         1 cm                                                                                                                                500 µm

 Figure 15. a) Barite precipitation patterns the in celestite-containing center of the domain after 10, 100
 and 200 hours [Reproduced in modifi ed form from J Poonoosamy et al. (2015) Dissolution–precipitation
 processes in tank experiments for testing numerical models for reactive transport calculations: Experiments
 and modelling. Journal of Contaminant Hydrology 177:1-17 with permission of Elsevier. Copyright 2015]
 b) EDS elemental mapping (pink: barium, dark blue: strontium) of a section of the celestite-containing
 zone at the end of the experiment, barite is seen to precipitate on the surface of celestite.


    This zone of higher barite precipitation led to significant modifications of permeability
and the flow patterns, as recorded by the measured pressure increase (Fig. 16a), despite
maintaining constant flow rates. Figure 16b shows the dissolved quantities of celestite replaced
by barite precipitation for the duration of the experiment.
     These experimental results were analyzed with a reactive transport model to reproduce
the observed mineral dissolution and precipitation patterns and the decrease in permeability.
Reactive transport analysis required the ability to model density-dependent flow and transport,
the evolution of porosity and the feedback of pore clogging on permeability and diffusion.
Poonoosamy et al. (2015) presented simulations that reproduced the experimental results:
evolution of the chloride concentration at the outlet (not shown), the increase in pressure due to
pore clogging (Fig. 16a), and the amount of dissolved celestite and precipitated barite (Fig. 16b).
222                                                                                               Seigneur et al.

                                                a)                                                                                             b)
                                          200                                                                                           0.16
                                                                            experimental
                                                          simulated for homogeneous barite precipitation                                0.14
         relative pressure increase (%)



                                                          simulated for heterogeneous barite precipitation




                                                                                                             mineral quantity (moles)
                                          150                                                                                           0.12
                                                                                                                                                                experimental celestite
                                                                                                                                         0.1              simulated celesite (homogeneous)
                                                                                                                                                         simulated celestite (heterogeneous)
                                          100                                                                                           0.08                     experimental barite
                                                                                                                                                           simulated barite (homogeneous)
                                                                                                                                        0.06               simulated barte (heterogeneous)

                                           50                                                                                           0.04

                                                                                                                                        0.02

                                            0                                                                                             0
                                                0    20     40    60    80 100 120 140 160 180 200                                             0    20     40   60    80 100 120 140 160 180 200
                                                                        time (hours)                                                                                  time (hours)

 Figure 16. a) Relative pressure increase as a function of barite precipitation and pore clogging over the
 duration of the experiment b) Mineral quantities showing the dissolution of celestite and replacement by
 barite. [Reproduced in modified form from J Poonoosamy et al. (2015) Dissolution–precipitation processes
 in tank experiments for testing numerical models for reactive transport calculations: Experiments and mod-
 elling. Journal of Contaminant Hydrology 177:1-17 with permission of Elsevier. Copyright 2015.]

The impact of evolving porosity on tortuosity and permeability were modeled using Archie’s
law and the Kozeny–Carman relationship. To obtain agreement between the experimental
results and the simulations, it was necessary to include a fine-grained celestite layer. Since a
larger amount of small celestite grains are located in this zone, locally higher reaction rates
were simulated which led to a more significant porosity and permeability reduction in a narrow
region, which had a substantial impact on flow, matching the experimental values.
     The benchmarking study of Poonoosamy et al. (2018) was based on these experiments.
Several codes (CORE2D, MIN3P-THCm, OpenGeoSys-GEM, PFLOTRAN, TOUGHREACT),
showed similar results regarding the evolution of porosity, mineral volume fraction, permeability
and concentrations of the main elements. However, discrepancies in the spatial porosity and
permeability patterns were observed. Therefore, the evolution of the flow patterns differ slightly
between the codes, and discrepancies increase with time, and become more important when
strong porosity changes occur (cases 3a and 3b from Poonoosamy et al. 2018).
Effects of dissolution on pore connectivity and diffusivity
     To understand and predict the rates of chemical weathering under diffusion-controlled
conditions, Navarre-Sitchler et al. (2009) carried out a combined X-ray synchrotron
microtomography and tracer diffusion experiment on a sample of weathered basalt from a Costa
Rican chronosequence. They used the resulting tortuosity-diffusivity model in the reactive transport
code CrunchFlow (Steefel et al. 2015a) to simulate the evolution of the weathering rind over 340
thousand years (Navarre-Sitchler et al. 2011). Using a sample of basalt from a 125 thousand years
Costa Rican alluvial terrace, they conducted a tracer experiment that was imaged with mXRF.
Figure 17 shows the distribution of the bromide tracer (blue) after 7 days resulting from diffusion
from left to right. Navarre-Sitchler et al. (2009) took the additional step of comparing these results
to estimates of the diffusivity from pore-network modeling (see discussion below).




                                           0                           0.1                      0.2                                      0.3                         0.4                       0.5

                                                                                                      Distance (cm)

 Figure 17. Bromide tracer (blue) diffusion profile after 7 days based on mXRF mapping at the Advanced Light
 Source, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. Diffusion is from left to right. (Navarre-Sitchler et al. 2009)
                          Reactive Transport in Evolving Porous Media                                     223

     Following the tracer experiment, Navarre-Sitchler et al. (2009) made use of X-ray synchrotron
microtomography to map the pore structure of samples of the weathered basalt. Using a simple
implementation of thresholding to map basalt versus pores, they were able to delineate chemical
weathering related macroporous zones (> 4.4 mm voxel resolution) that were connected in 3-D.
Navarre-Sitchler et al. (2009) then carried out numerical tracer diffusion experiments in 3-D
cubes of weathered basalt by assuming a low diffusivity of 1.75 × 10−14 m2 s−1 for the largely
unconnected pore structure of unaltered basalt based on separate tracer diffusion experiments
(not shown) and a free ion diffusivity of 10−9 m2 s−1 (corresponding to a tortuosity of 1.0) for
connected pores that can be fully resolved with the 4.4 mm discretization. Implemented in this
way, the results of a 3-D numerical tracer diffusion experiment using CrunchFlow is similar
to what could be obtained from a pore-network model. A 2-D slice through the skeletonized
pore structure of one of the weathered zones is shown in Figure 18a (basalt in blue, pores in
red). Results of the numerical tracer experiment are shown in Figure 18b, with diffusion of
the tracer from the bottom of the figure towards the top. Note that in these 3-D tracer diffusion
simulations, only two distinct tortuosities (or diffusion coefficients) are used and they are based
on the segmented 3-D porosity map of the weathered sample.

            a)                                        b)
                                                    scaled distance (cm)
          distance (cm)




                             distance (cm)                                 distance (cm)

  Figure 18. a) Segmented X-ray synchrotron microtomographic data collected at the Advanced Light
  Source at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory with a voxel resolution of 4.4 mm. Macropores devel-
  oped as a result of chemical weathering in the basalt and are connected primarily in the third dimension
  (into the page), with red indicating pores, blue indicating basalt. b) Tracer diffusion simulation results
  using the pore structure shown in Figure 18a. Results are shown after 7 days of diffusion of the tracer
  from bottom to top. Simulation assumed a Dirichlet boundary condition at the bottom with a fixed tracer
  concentration of 0.01. See Navarre-Sitchler et al. (2009) for a more complete description of the experiment.


     The segmented microtomography data on the weathered basalts was then used to quantify
connected versus total porosity in the samples using the burning algorithm Percolate (Bentz et
al. 2002). The data on all Costa Rican basalt samples analyzed indicate that connected porosity
at > 4.4 µm increases markedly at about 9% total porosity (Fig. 19a).
     The effective diffusion coefficient can be described with a modified Archie’s Law (Eqn. 15)
model that incorporates a critical porosity threshold φcrit value of 9% (Eqn. 16), below which the
porosity is considered to be largely unconnected. The parameter a in Equation (15) is taken as
1.3 while the parameter n is assumed to be 1.0 for 3-D volumes measuring 220 mm on a side
(Navarre-Sitchler et al. 2009). Figure 19b compares experimental points to this relationship with
the usual Archie’s law described by Equation (13), which used the total porosity as mapped with
the X-ray synchrotron microtomography with a 4.4 mm voxel resolution.
     Based on this estimate of the effective diffusion coefficient shown in Figure 19b and captured
in Equations (15) and (16), it was possible to compare the results of reactive transport simulations
224                                                                                                                            Seigneur et al.

                                                                   a)                                                                                                                    b)




                                                                                                                                            effective diffusion coefficient (m2 /s)
                                                                   1

                                                                  0.8                                                                                                                 10−10
                                                   connectivity
                                                                  0.6                                                                                                                 10−11

                                                                                                                                                                                      10−12
                                                                  0.4

                                                                                                                                                                                      10−13                             measured
                                                                  0.2                                                                                                                                                     Archie
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Archie with φcrit
                                                                                                                                                                                      10−14
                                                                   0
                                                                        0   0.1   0.2 0.3                                      0.4    0.5                                                     0   0.1   0.2 0.3                                  0.4   0.5
                                                                                   porosity                                                                                                              porosity

                  Figure 19. a) Connected versus total porosity for all sets of uCT data on Costa Ricanrasalts (Navarre-Sitchler
                                               e
                  et al. 2009). b) Values of Dl estimated using Archie’s law (Eqn. 13 and 14) or from equation 15 using effec-
                  tive porosity (Eqn. 16) as the scaling parameter. These estimates are compared with measured liquid effective
                  diffusion coefficients in basalt (combined data from Navarre-Sitchler et al. 2009 and Sato et al. 1997).

to observations of weathering rind thickness of basalt clasts in the Costa Rican alluvial terraces. As
shown in the study, it is only possible to capture the four characteristic features of the weathered
basalts, including (1) the mineralogy of weathering products, (2) weathering rind thickness, (3) the
coincidence of plagioclase and pyroxene reaction fronts, and (4) the thickness of the weathering
rinds, by including the modified Archie’s Law formulation of effective diffusion coefficient. In
particular, the coincidence of the pyroxene and plagioclase fronts, which have differing intrinsic
solubilities and reactivities, is possible only with a threshold model of the kind implemented
here (Navarre-Sitchler et al. 2011). In an unmodified Archie’s Law formulation, the pyroxene and
plagioclase fronts would move at different rates, so it is because of the generation of connected
porosity as a result of mineral dissolution (weathering) that the mineral fronts advance in lock
step. Figure 20 shows the position of the weathering fronts (data and solid lines model fit) as
quantified using the mass transfer coefficients for calcium relative to immobile titanium at 240,
125 and 7 thousand years for quaternary terraces 1, 2 and 3, respectively.

                                      a)                                                                                  b)                                                                                                                    c)
                                           quaternary terraces 1                                                                     quaternary terraces 2                                                                                             quaternary terraces 3
calcium mass transfer coefficient




                                                                                    calcium mass transfer coefficient




                                                                                                                                                                                                          calcium mass transfer coefficient




                                      0                                                                                   0                                                                                                                     0
                                             data                                                                                      data 1                                                                                                            data 1
                                    −0.2     model                                                                      −0.2           data 2                                                                                                 −0.2       data 2
                                                                                                                                       model                                                                                                             model
                                    −0.4                                                                                −0.4                                                                                                                  −0.4

                                    −0.6                                                                                −0.6                                                                                                                  −0.6

                                    −0.8                                                                                −0.8                                                                                                                  −0.8

                                     −1                                                                                  −1                                                                                                                    −1
                                             68       69                     70                                                         28         30                                                                                                   11      12    13
                                              distance (mm)                                                                             distance (mm)                                                                                                     distance (mm)

                  Figure 20. Model predictions compared to observed values of the calcium mass transfer coefficient. A
                  positive value represents an enrichment of calcium relative to the immobile titanium. The three panels
                  correspond to different quaternary terraces, and model predictions are compared to measured data. More
                  information can be found in Navarre-Sitchler et al. (2011).


Evolving reactivity
    A case study for evolving reactivity is provided by Beckingham et al. (2016, 2017) on
highly reactive volcaniclastic sediments from the Nagaoka pilot CO2 injection site in western
Japan. The investigators carried out batch and coreflood experiments on a sample of sediment
                       Reactive Transport in Evolving Porous Media                                   225

from the site to determine the time evolution of the sediment and fluid as a result of injection
of CO2-saturated fluid. They combined the experiments with multi-scale image analysis using
synchrotron X-ray microCT, SEM QEMSCAN, XRD, SANS, and FIB-SEM to map the initial
mineralogy and pore structure of the sediment (Fig. 21). The mineral mapping provided
the initial conditions for continuum reactive transport modeling with the code CrunchFlow
(Steefel et al. 2015a), and the simulation results were compared against effluent chemistry
over the course of the batch and coreflood experiments.




 Figure 21. Registered SEM BSE and QEMSCAN image with multi-scale macro and micro pore connectiv-
 ity analysis. Connected macro pores are depicted in white and connected micro-porous smectite regions
 are depicted in light blue [Reproduced form LE Beckingham et al. (2016) Evaluation of mineral reactive
 surface area estimates for prediction of reactivity of a multi-mineral sediment. Geochimica et Cosmochi-
 mica Acta188:310–329 with permission of Elsevier. Copyright 2016.].

     The mapping with a multi-scale image analysis described provides both the modal
mineralogy of the complex sediment and the co-location of connected porosity and reactive
phases (Beckingham et al. 2016), thus defining more rigorously its bulk effective reactive
surface area. In addition, the imaging was used to create a grain size distribution of the most
reactive phases that could be used directly in the modeling. This was considered necessary
because the fluid chemistry in both the batch and coreflood experiments evolved significantly
over time, with early times showing very high cation (Ca2+ and Mg2+) and silica concentrations
that were as much as 10× higher than what they were at the end of the ~650 hours experiment.
    The hypothesis was that the fine fraction of phases like pyroxene and plagioclase could
account for the high reactivity early in the experiment because of their high specific surface
area (Fig. 22). Using the mapping to constrain the volume fraction of the pyroxene and
plagioclase (Table 1), it was possible to use the reactive transport simulations in both the batch
and coreflood experiments to determine whether the pronounced evolved reactivity could be
                                              0.15



                                               0.1
                              surface (m2 )




                                              0.05



                                                0
                                                     0      100      200     300     400
                                                      effective particle diameter (µm)

          Figure 22: Literature values of BET surface area of pyroxene (Beckingham et al. 2016).
226                                                                                                     Seigneur et al.

Table 1. Volume fractions and corresponding calculated surface areas for plagioclase minerals
used in grain size distribution model (Beckingham et al. 2016)

                                             Weighted                            Albite                                         An25                                               Labradorite
                          Grain              average        Volume                                     Surface      Volume %           Surface                              Vol %             Surface
                          size               diameter       % total                                    area         total              area                                 total             area
                          (µm)               (µm)           plagioclase                                (m²/g)       plagioclase        (m²/g)                               plagioclase       (m²/g)
                                    1–20           0.025           0.0007                               393.89          0.00016         375.27                                     0.0015      379.41
                                    1–20              0.1          0.0007                                 98.47         0.00016             93.82                                  0.0015       94.85
                                    1–20              0.5          0.0007                                 19.69         0.00016             18.76                                  0.0015       18.97
                                    1–20                5          0.0007                                  1.97         0.00016                         1.88                       0.0015           1.89
                                20–40              23.38                     0.32                          0.42                0.07                     0.40                         0.66           0.41
                                40–60              43.02                     1.26                          0.23                0.29                     0.22                         2.63           0.22
                                60–80              66.99                     1.79                          0.15                0.41                     0.14                         3.72           0.14
                           80–100                  90.22                     1.67                          0.11                0.38                     0.10                         3.47           0.11
                          100–120                108.94                      2.04                         0.091                0.47         0.086                                    4.24       0.087
                          120–140                131.07                      2.19                         0.075                0.51         0.072                                    4.57       0.072
                          140–160                150.12                      2.53                         0.066                0.58         0.062                                    5.27       0.063
                          160–180                166.74                      3.47                         0.059                0.80         0.056                                    7.22       0.057
                          180–200                190.33                      4.13                         0.052                0.95         0.049                                    8.60       0.049
                          200–220                212.11                      1.42                         0.046                0.33         0.044                                    2.97       0.045
                          220–240                227.50                      2.64                         0.043                0.61         0.041                                    5.49       0.042
                          240–260                247.05                      3.38                         0.039                0.78         0.038                                    7.04       0.038
                          260–280                274.33                      3.02                         0.036                0.71         0.034                                    6.42       0.034


attributed to the early reaction and then disappearance of the finest mineral fractions. While
the trends were correct for pyroxene and plagioclase, it was found that it was also necessary to
include a reactive glass phase to account for the high concentrations and reactivity (Fig. 23).


                           a)                                                                 b)                   Mg
                                                                                                                                                                  c)
                                    ·10−4        Ca                                                    ·10−4                                                               ·10−4         Si
                           2                                                                  2                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                                                       experimental
                                                                                                                                                                                     RF = 10 (no glass)
                                                                                                                                                                                     RF = 4.3 (no glass)
 concentration (mol/kg)




                                                                    concentration (mol/kg)




                                                                                                                                        concentration (mol/kg)




                          1.5                                                                1.5                                                                 1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                      RF = 4.3 (glass)


                           1                                                                  1                                                                   1



                          0.5                                                                0.5                                                                 0.5



                           0                                                                  0                                                                   0
                                0           200       400    600                                   0           200       400      600                                  0            200       400          600
                                             time (hours)                                                       time (hours)                                                         time (hours)

     Figure 23. Observed (black circles) and model predicted (red lines) effluent concentrations incorporating
     grain size distributions for plagioclase and pyroxene minerals, with and without inclusion of glass phase.
     (Beckingham et al. 2016).
                      Reactive Transport in Evolving Porous Media                               227

                       CHALLENGES OF AND OPPORTUNITIES
                      FOR REACTIVE TRANSPORT MODELING
                          IN EVOLVING POROUS MEDIA
State of the science for modeling reactive transport in evolving porous media
     For the aforementioned reasons and given the large variety of pore structures and
heterogeneities, it is evident that obtaining continuum scale relationships for effective
transport properties and reactivities in porous media, in particular under dynamically evolving
conditions, constitutes a major challenge.
     Accurate simulation of breakthrough curves, mineral abundances and concentration
distributions relies heavily on the adequate evaluation of the evolution of the porous medium’s
effective porosity, transport and reaction properties. As discussed above, a wide range of feedback
relationships exists, relating transport parameters back to porosity; however, these relationships
provide diverse predictions of the transport properties, in some cases differing by several orders
of magnitude. In addition, it has been shown that identical systems might evolve differently
as a function of transport regime, as well as the ratio between the time scales of reaction and
transport. Furthermore, it is also common that relationships between transport parameters and
porosity themselves evolve, as the pore structure is modified. Keeping in mind that the evolution
of porous media is predominantly affected by processes occurring at the pore scale, and that
mineralogical compositions and reactivities can vary widely, it becomes clear that the predictive
capabilities of relationships describing the evolution of porosity, tortuosity, permeability and
reactivity are limited. It is necessary to constrain these relationships by observational data on a
case-by-case basis, although we are confident that some generalizations can eventually be drawn
in terms of processes and materials. To this regard, the presented case studies show adequate
approaches on how to incorporate pore-scale observations into the continuum approach.
Although some theoretical underpinnings exist, relationships to describe the evolution of
transport and reactivity parameters remain empirical in nature and are case specific. However,
despite these shortcomings, empirical relationships, often in the form of power laws, have proven
useful to provide a quantitative interpretation of observational data under dynamic and evolving
conditions. Examples include problems involving diffusive mass transport (Seigneur et al. 2017;
Georget et al. 2018), changing permeability (Mok et al. 2002; Luhmann et al. 2014) and evolving
reactivity (Jeen et al. 2007; Noiriel et al. 2009). Although empirical in nature, these relationships
provide insight and an opportunity for quantitative interpretation of feedback mechanisms.
Extreme cases: Complete clogging and solid structure collapse
     It is relatively trivial to implement these empirical relationships in continuum scale reactive
transport codes. However, the simulation of extreme cases of evolving porous media poses a
challenge. On the one hand, complete clogging causes the disappearance of the water phase,
which most geochemical solvers used in simulators are not able to deal with. Typically, reactive
transport codes deal with the clogging problem by setting an arbitrary porosity threshold value,
below which groundwater flow and solute migration does not occur. Although benchmarking
exercises have been successful at verifying the correct implementation of permeability–porosity
and tortuosity–porosity relationships, obtaining agreement between different reactive transport
codes under clogging conditions has been more difficult (Xie et al. 2015). On the other hand,
simulations can yield a substantial increase of porosity that, in fact, might not be physically
representative, since the solid matrix would eventually collapse. This constitutes a mechanical
issue which at this point in time is not commonly considered by reactive transport simulators.
228                                       Seigneur et al.

Unsaturated flow relationships
     Modelling of unsaturated cases, whether through Richards equation (Eqn. 2) or two-
phase approaches (Eqn. 1), requires the use of relationships to take into account the material’s
hydraulic and transport properties. The models of Brooks Corey, van Genuchten provide the
water retention characteristics (capillary-pressure), as well as the relative permeabilities of
the fluid phases. These models involve several different empirical parameters. The latter have
been assessed for different porous media and general understanding of their dependence on
physical properties has been acquired (e.g., Zhang et al. 2017 for the dependence on grain
sizes). Della Vecchia et al. (2015) also described a model linking pore size distribution to
water retention models, specifically for clays. Similarly, Suazo et al. (2016) studied the
evolution of the water retention curves during cement hydration. However, only a limited
amount of research has been dedicated to the prediction of how these parameters evolve as the
porous media undergoes chemical perturbations. Furthermore, no clear relationship between
the unsaturated parameters and porosity has been described. For these reasons, most reactive
transport simulations consider these parameters to be constant.
Numerical approaches for coupling of flow and reactive transport
     The reactive transport problem is commonly solved by either the global implicit approach
(e.g., Crunchflow, MIN3P), the sequential-iterative approach (Hytec), or the sequential non-
iterative approach (e.g., PHT3D, HP1) (Steefel et al. 2015a). Independent of the numerical
methods used, permeabilities and reactivities are typically updated in a time-lagged fashion
(e.g., Mayer et al. 2002 for MIN3P). While this is not necessarily the case for porosity and
diffusion coefficient (Lagneau and Van Der Lee 2010), this implies that at each time step,
small mass balance errors are introduced.
     An additional complication occurs due to the feedback of evolving porous media
parameters between reactive transport and flow. In most models, groundwater flow and
multicomponent reactive transport are solved sequentially. This approach is adequate if there
is no feedback of the reactive transport solution on the flow problem. However, as depicted
in Figure 1, this is not the case for evolving porous media, since a change in porosity affects
the storage term in the flow equation (Eqn. 1 and Eqn. 2) and the flux term, by modifying the
permeability. The decoupled treatment of groundwater flow and reactive transport makes it
necessary to take relatively small time steps to avoid the introduction of mass balance errors.
However, recent efforts to recouple multiphase flow and reactive transport in case of variable
porosity have been implemented in Hytec (Seigneur et al. 2018).
Towards an integrated model for evolving porous media
     As outlined above, the concepts of surface area, tortuosity and (effective) porosity play a
significant role in evolving porous media. Usually, tortuosity and surface area are linked to diffusion
and reactivity. Empirical relationships are generally used to update their evolution. Relationships
for different evolving parameters are commonly independent from one another, despite the fact that
they are inherently correlated, as suggested by numerical studies by Koponen et al. (1997). While
general and universal correlations between these relationships are difficult to obtain, common
trends can be estimated. Typically, as porosity increases, surface area tends to decrease (Koponen et
al. 1997), while diffusivity (and hence, as defined in this chapter, tortuosity) increases (Knackstedt
and Zhang 1994; Koponen et al. 1997). Saripalli et al. (2002) have also shown that tortuosity can
be related to surface area (a higher surface area leads to a lower diffusivity/tortuosity).
    Most of the efforts to estimate effective transport properties such as tortuosity and permeability
have focused on developing relationships invoking porosity, tortuosity and/or surface area.
While permeability and diffusivity represent fundamentally different transport processes, their
dependence on tortuosity (hence surface area) and on the pore throat size are similar.
                      Reactive Transport in Evolving Porous Media                            229

     As was observed for the simulation of clogging reactions during cement carbonation,
systematic errors are encountered when attempting to reproduce experimentally observed
alteration depths. A failure to reproduce observed degradation depths, while managing to
reproduce breakthrough curves, might be an indication of the need to work towards a more
integrated framework of evolving parameters.
      While the mathematical description of such an integrated approach is not yet determined,
it is evident than an approach linked to porosity evolution alone is not suited to properly
describe the processes which occur at the pore-scale and the continuum scale. Instead,
geometrical considerations about the structural organization of the pore scale might be more
appropriate. As an example, the surface area in itself carries more information about the
potential interactions between the fluid and the solid matrix. On the one hand, high surface
area indicates tortuous pathways which are linked with lower transport properties. In addition,
reactivity is also intrinsically linked to the surface area.
     Let us consider the observed inverse correlations between permeability and porosity. An
integrated generalized approach based on surface area might be able to reproduce these results
in a better way than one based on porosity alone.
Opportunities related to imaging techniques, pore scale modeling and upscaling
     In recent years, imaging techniques have helped to improve our understanding of pore
structure and its evolution, as well as the effective transport properties. Such techniques,
combined with high-resolution of reactive transport at the pore scale (Molins et al. 2012;
Steefel et al. 2013; Molins et al. 2014) are destined to be used increasingly, as they allow for
a process-based assessment of the evolution of the pore structure. Imaging and pore scale
modeling techniques have already provided outstanding results and insights. Molins et al.
(2017) reproduced dissolution processes in a multi-mineral fracture zone by incorporating
the heterogeneity of the spatial distribution of minerals. In another study, it was possible to
reproduce the wormholing processes by direct simulation at the pore scale (Molins 2015). In
addition, pore scale modeling has provided a means to document and quantitatively assess the
effect of dissolution and precipitation reactions on the pore structure, as they occur within a
porous material (Molins 2015; Noiriel 2015; Bultreys et al. 2016; Pereira Nunes et al. 2016).
Future improvement in the resolution of imaging techniques might even make it possible to
characterize porous media at even smaller scales and improve pore scale models built from
these methods. However, it is unlikely that pore scale simulations will be able soon to deal
with the large time and spatial scales required for engineering purposes.
     Pore scale modelling is a promising tool and may eventually allow the derivation and
upscaling of transport parameters for use in a continuum approach. This modeling technique
may be able to help overcome the biggest gaps which still exist for the continuum approach,
in particular when applied to evolving porous media. In the future, it is likely that combined
approaches (micro-continuum) will provide a tool to bring the knowledge acquired from the
pore space to the macroscale (Steefel et al. 2015b).


                                      CONCLUSIONS
     Biogeochemical reactions in porous media, involving mineral dissolution and precipitation,
can lead to significant modifications of the pore structure with a potential dramatic evolution of
the material’s properties in a wide variety of natural and engineered systems. Reactive transport
modelling is a useful deterministic tool to investigate these strongly coupled nonlinear effects.
However, an accurate description of these phenomena requires a thorough understanding of
their dynamics at the pore scale.
230                                      Seigneur et al.

    The last decade has provided major improvements with pore scale imaging and
simulation. First, imaging techniques have allowed to reveal more detailed information about
pore structures and their evolutions at a sub-micron level. Second, the parallel increase in
computing capabilities opened the door to pore-scale simulations which can now be performed
on 3D image samples. These tools, used together, provide precious data for developing an
improved understanding of how porous media evolve under different conditions.
      However, there are still major shortcomings to overcome. First, the resolution of imaging
techniques is currently insufficient to provide adequate insights into the 3D-structure of fine
grained materials. Indeed, porous media in which nanometric pores constitute the building
blocks of the pore structure (clays, cement), cannot be accurately resolved by these imaging
techniques at this point in time. The second problem, potentially more challenging, is that
reactive transport simulations relevant to engineering problems usually involve scales (m–km)
which are orders of magnitude larger than the scales at which processes relevant to porous
media evolution occur (nm–µm). Continuum approaches for these engineering purposes likely
still have a promising future, despite their inherent limitations.
     Some significant limitations remain. The clogging phenomenon still constitutes a challenge
due to the inherent complexity of capturing the effect on transport processes when near zero
porosities are approached and the associated numerical issues. Furthermore, there is still a
lack of experimental data to calibrate reactive transport models. Additionally, the development
of fractures due to internal stresses (either due to heat generation, mineral dissolution or
precipitation) have been observed in different experimental setups. Unfortunately, a full
coupled problem involving heat and mechanics is not available.
     Despite obvious challenges inherent to the continuum approach regarding the evolution of
relevant parameters describing a porous medium’s properties (tortuosity, permeability, reactivity
and surface area), quantitative reactive transport analysis of evolving systems has been successful.
Additionally, significant knowledge has been acquired through recently developed micro-
continuum approaches. Empirical relations for transport (such as Archie’s law, the Kozeny–Carman
relationships or various power laws) or reactivity (threshold passivation or shrinking-core model)
are not meant to be physically representative of pore-scale process. It must be acknowledged
that it is not realistic to expect that using these relationships would lead to a fully process-based
assessment of experimental data. Nevertheless, we now possess sufficient knowledge about how
certain processes can be modelled through the use of these empirical relations.


                                   ACKNOWLEGMENTS
    The contributions by Nicolas Seigneur were supported by a postdoctoral fellowship
through the TERRE-NET program, a strategic network funded by NSERC (Natural Science
and Engineering Research Council of Canada).
      K. Ulrich Mayer would like to acknowledge funding by NSERC through a Discovery Grant.
    The contributions by Carl I. Steefel were supported by the Director, Office of Science,
Basic Energy Sciences, Chemical Sciences, Geosciences, and Biosciences Division, of
the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231 to Lawrence
Berkeley National Laboratory.
    We would like to acknowledge Jenna Poonoosamy for providing additional material for
Figure 15b. We would like to thank Tom Al (UOttawa) for providing the images for Figure 3.
                          Reactive Transport in Evolving Porous Media                                            231

                                                REFERENCES
Aharonov E, Tenthorey E CH S (1998) Precipitation sealing and diagenesis: 2. Theoretical analysis. J Geophys Res
      Solid Earth 10:23969–23981
Aharonov E, Spiegelman M, Kelemen P (2004) Three-dimensional flow and reaction in porous media: Implications
      for the Earth’s mantle and sedimentary basins. J Geophys Res: Solid Earth 102:14821–14833
Akanni KA, Evans JW, Abramson IS (1987). Effective transport coefficients in heterogeneous media. Chem Eng Sci
      42:1945–1954
Algive L, Bekri S, Vizika O (2010) Pore-network modeling dedicated to the determination of the petrophysical-
      property changes in the presence of reactive fluid. SPE J 15:618–633
Algive L, Békri S, Nader FH, Lerat O, Vizika O (2012) Impact oraf diagenetic alterations on the petrophysical and
      multiphase flow properties of carbonate rocks using a reactive pore network modeling approach. Oil & Gas
      Science and Technology–Revue d’IFP Energies nouvelles 67:147–160
Andreani M, Luquot L, Gouze P, Godard M, Hoise E, Gibert B (2009) Experimental study of carbon sequestration
      reactions controlled by the percolation of CO2-rich brine through peridotites. Environ Sci Technol 43:1226-1231
Atkinson A, Everitt NM, Guppy R (1987) Evolution of pH in a radwaste repository: Experimental simulation of
      cement leaching. UKAEA Harwell Lab.(UK). Materials Development Div
Auroy M, Poyet S, Le Bescop P, Torrenti J-M (2013) Impact of carbonation on the durability of cementitious materials:
      water transport properties characterization. EPJ Web of Conferences 56:01008
Barlet-Gouedard V, Rimmele G, Goffe B, Porcherie O (2006) Mitigation strategies for the risk of CO2 migration
      through wellbores. In: IADC/SPE Drilling Conference. Soc Petrol Eng
Beckingham LE, Peters CA, Um W, Jones KW, Lindquist W (2013) 2D and 3D imaging resolution trade-offs in
      quantifying pore throats for prediction of permeability. Adv Water Resour 62:1–12
Beckingham LE, Mitnick EH, Steefel CI, Zhang S, Voltolini M, Swift AM, Yang L, Cole DR, Sheets JM, Ajo-Franklin
      JB, DePaolo DJ (2016) Evaluation of mineral reactive surface area estimates for prediction of reactivity of a
      multi-mineral sediment. Geochim Cosmochim Acta 188:310–329
Beckingham LE, Steefel CI, Swift AM, Voltolini M, Yang L, Anovitz LM, Sheets JM, Cole DR, Kneafsey TJ, Mitnick
      EH, Zhang S (2017) Evaluation of accessible mineral surface areas for improved prediction of mineral reaction
      rates in porous media. Geochim Cosmochim Acta 205:31–49
Bentz DP, Garboczi EJ (1991) Percolation of phases in a three-dimensional cement paste microstructural model. Cem
      Concr Rese 21:325–344
Bentz DP, Garboczi EJ (1992) Modeling the leaching of calcium hydroxide from cement paste : effects on pore space
      percolation and diffusivity model description and technique microstructure Model Mater Struct 25:523–533
Bentz DP, Mizell S, Satterfield SG, Devaney JE, George WL, Ketcham PM, Graham JR, Porterfield JE, Quenard DA,
      Vallee FA, Sallee H (2002) The visible cement data set. J Res Nati Inst Stand Technol 107:137
Bernabé Y, Mok U, Evans B (2003) Permeability–porosity relationships in rocks subjected to various evolution
      processes. Pure Appl Geophys 160:937–960
Bertron A, Coutand M, Cameleyre X, Escadeillas G, Duchesne J (2005) Attaques chimique biologique des effluents
      agricoles et agroalimentaires sur les matériaux cimentaires. Matér Tech 93:111–121
Bickmore BR, Nagy KL, Young JS, Drexler JW (2001) Nitrate-cancrinite precipitation on quartz sand in simulated
      Hanford tank solutions. Environ Sci Technol 15:22
Bildstein O, Worden RH, Brosse E (2001) Assesment of anhydrite dissolution as the rate-limiting step during
      thermochemical sulfate reduction. Chem Geol 176:173–189
Birk S, Liedl R, Sauter M, Teutsch G (2003) Hydraulic boundary conditions as a controlling factor in karst genesis: A
      numerical modeling study on artesian conduit development in gypsum. Water Resour Res 39:1004
Birk S, Liedl R, Sauter M, Teutsch G (2005) Simulation of the development of gypsum maze caves. Environ Geol 48:296–306
Bjørlykke K, Ramm M, Saigal GC (1989) Sandstone diagenesis and porosity modification during basin evolution.
      Geologische Rundschau 78:243–268
Blowes DW, Jambor JL (1990) The pore-water geochemistry and the mineralogy of the vadose zone of sulfide
      tailings, Waite Amulet, Quebec, Canada. Appl Geochem 5:327–346
Blowes DW, Reardon EJ, Jambor JL, Cherry JA (1991) The formation and potential importance of cemented layers in
      inactive sulfide mine tailings. Geochim Cosmochim Acta 55:965–978
Blowes DW, Ptacek CJ, Benner SG, McRae CWT, Bennett TA, Puls RW (2000) Treatment of inorganic contaminants
      using permeable reactive barriers. J Contam Hydrol 45:123–137
Blunt MJ, Bijeljic B, Dong H, Gharbi O, Iglauer S, Mostaghimi P, Paluszny A, Pentland C (2013) Pore-scale imaging
      and modelling. Adv Water Resour 51:197–216
Boudreau BP (1996) The diffusive tortuosity of fine-grained unlithified sediments. Geochim Cosmochim Acta 60:3139–3142
Brookfield AE, Blowes DW, Mayer KU (2006) Integration of field measurements and reactive transport modelling to
      evaluate contaminant transport at a sulfide mine tailings impoundment. J Contam Hydrol 20:1–22
Brovelli A, Malaguerra F, Barry DA (2009) Bioclogging in porous media: Model development and sensitivity to initial
      conditions. Environ Modell Software 24:611–626
Brunet JP, Li L, Karpyn ZT, Kutchko BG, Strazisar B, Bromhal G (2013) Dynamic evolution of cement composition
      and transport properties under conditions relevant to geological carbon sequestration. Energy Fuels 21:8
Budek A, Szymczak P (2012) Network models of dissolution of porous media. Phys Rev E 86:4208–4220
232                                              Seigneur et al.

Buijse MA, Glasbergen G (2005) A semi-empirical model to calculate wormhole growth in carbonate acidizing. In:
      SPE Annual Technical Conference and Exhibition. Soc Petrol Eng
Bultreys T, Boone MA, Boone MN, De Schryver T, Masschaele B, Van Hoorebeke L, Cnudde V (2016) Fast
      laboratory-based micro-computed tomography for pore-scale research: illustrative experiments and perspectives
      on the future. Adv Water Res 95:341–351
Buss HL, Lüttge A, Brantley SL (2007) Etch pit formation on iron silicate surfaces during siderophore-promoted
      dissolution. Chem Geol 240:326–342
Chagneau A, Claret F, Enzmann F, Kersten M, Heck S, Madé B, Schäfer T (2015) Mineral precipitation-induced porosity
      reduction and its effect on transport parameters in diffusion-controlled porous media. Geochem Trans 16:13
Chou H, Wu L, Zeng L, Chang A (2012) Evaluation of solute diffusion tortuosity factor models for variously saturated
      soils. Water Resour Res 48:W10539
Civan F (2001) Scale effect on porosity and permeability: Kinetics, model, and correlation. AIChE journal 47:271–87
Colón CF, Oelkers EH, Schott J (2004) Experimental investigation of the effect of dissolution on sandstone
      permeability, porosity, and reactive surface area1. Geochim Cosmochim Acta 68:805–817
Daccord G, Touboul E, Lenormand R (1989) Carbonate acidizing: toward a quantitative model of the wormholing
      phenomenon. SPE Prod Eng 4:63–68
Dauzères A, De Windt L, Sammaljärvi J, Bartier D, Techer I, Detilleux V, Siitari-Kauppi M (2019) Mineralogical and
      microstructural evolution of Portland cement paste/argillite interfaces at 70° C–Considerations for diffusion and
      porosity properties. Cem Concr Res 115:414–25
Dauzères A, Le Bescop P, Sardini P, Coumes CC (2010) Physico-chemical investigation of clayey/cement-based
      materials interaction in the context of geological waste disposal: Experimental approach and results. Cem Concr
      Res 40:1327–1340
Daval D, Martinez I, Corvisier J, Findling N, Goffé B, Guyot F (2009) Carbonation of Ca-bearing silicates, the case
      of wollastonite: Experimental investigations and kinetic modeling. Chem Geol 265:63–78
De Boever E, Varloteaux C, Nader FH, Foubert A, Békri S, Youssef S, Rosenberg E (2012) Quantification and
      prediction of the 3D pore network evolution in carbonate reservoir rocks. Oil Gas Sci Technol–Revue d’IFP
      Energies nouvelles 67:161–178
De Windt L, Badreddine R (2007) Modelling of long-term dynamic leaching tests applied to solidified/stabilised
      waste. Waste Manage 27:1638–1647
Della Vecchia G, Dieudonné A-C, Jommi C, Charlier R (2015) Accounting for evolving pore size distribution in water
      retention models for compacted clays. Int J Numer Anal Methods Geomech 39:702–723
Demers I, Molson J, Bussière B, Laflamme D (2013) Numerical modeling of contaminated neutral drainage from a
      waste-rock field test cell. Appl Geochem 33:346–356
Deng H, Spycher N (2019) Modeling reactive transport processes in fractures. Rev Mineral Geochem 85:49–74
Deng H, Molins S, Steefel C, DePaolo D, Voltolini M, Yang L, Ajo-Franklin JA (2016) 2.5 D reactive transport model
      for fracture alteration simulation. Environ Sci Technol 50:7564–7571
Deng H, Molins S, Trebotich D, Steefel CI, DePaolo D (2018) Pore-scale numerical investigation of the impacts of surface
      roughness: Upscaling of reaction rates in rough fractures. Geochim Cosmochim Acta 239:374–389
Dentz M, Gouze P, Carrera J (2011) Effective non-local reaction kinetics for transport in physically and chemically
      heterogeneous media. J Contam Hydrol 120–121:222–236
Detwiler RL, Glass RJ, Bourcier WL (2003) Experimental observations of fracture dissolution: The role of Peclet
      number on evolving aperture variability. Geophys Res Lett 30:1648
Dewanckele J, De Kock T, Boone MA, Cnudde V, Brabant L, Boone MN, Fronteau G, Van Hoorebeke L, Jacobs P
      (2012) 4D imaging and quantification of pore structure modifications inside natural building stones by means of
      high resolution X-ray CT Sci Total Environ 416:436–48
Diamond S (2000) Mercury porosimetry: an inappropriate method for the measurement of pore size distributions in
      cement-based materials. Cem Concr Res 30:1517–1525
Dobson PF, Kneafsey TJ, Hulen J, Simmons A (2003a) Porosity, permeability, and fluid flow in the Yellowstone
      geothermal system, Wyoming. J Volcanol Geothermal Res 123:313–324
Dobson PF, Kneafsey TJ, Sonnenthal EL, Spycher N, Apps JA (2003b) Experimental and numerical simulation of dissolution
      and precipitation: implications for fracture sealing at Yucca Mountain, Nevada. J Contam Hydrol 62:459–476
Doulati Ardejani F, Jannesar Malakooti S, Ziaedin Shafaei S, Shahhosseini M (2014) A numerical multi-component
      reactive model for pyrite oxidation and pollutant transportation in a pyritic, carbonate-rich coal waste pile in
      Northern Iran. Mine Water Environ 33:121–132
Egermann P, Bekri S, Vizika O (2010) An integrated approach to assess the petrophysical properties of rocks altered
      by rock-fluid interactions (CO2 injection). Petrophysics 51: SPWLA-2010-v51n1a2
Emmanuel S, Berkowitz B (2007) Effects of pore-size controlled solubility on reactive transport in heterogeneous
      rock. Geophys Res Lett 34:L06404
Emmanuel S, Ague JJ, Walderhaug O (2010) Interfacial energy effects and the evolution of pore size distributions
      during quartz precipitation in sandstone. Geochim Cosmochim Acta 74:3539–3552
Emmanuel S, Anovitz LM, Day-Stirrat RJ (2015) Effects of coupled chemo-mechanical processes on the evolution of
      pore-size distributions in geological media. Rev Mineral Geochem 80:45–60
                          Reactive Transport in Evolving Porous Media                                         233

Ezeuko CC, Sen A, Grigoryan A, Gates ID (2011) Pore-network modeling of biofilm evolution in porous media.
      Biotechnology and bioengineering 108:2413–2423
Ferrier RJ, Cai L, Lin Q, Gorman GJ, Neethling SJ (2016) Models for apparent reaction kinetics in heap leaching:
      A new semi-empirical approach and its comparison to shrinking core and other particle-scale models.
      Hydrometallurgy 166:22–33
Fontaine FJH, Rabinowicz M, Boulègue J (2001) Permeability changes due to mineral diagenesis in fractured crust:
      implications for hydrothermal circulation at mid-ocean ridges. Earth Planet Sci Lett 184:407–425
Fox DT, Guo L, Fujita Y, Huang H, Redden G (2016) Experimental and numerical analysis of parallel reactant flow
      and transverse mixing with mineral precipitation in homogeneous and heterogeneous porous media. Transp
      Porous Media 111:605–626
Fredd CN (2000) Dynamic model of wormhole formation demonstrates conditions for effective skin reduction during
      carbonate matrix acidizing. In:SPE Permian Basin Oil and Gas Recovery Conference. Soc Petrol Eng
Fredd CN, Fogler HS (1999) Optimum conditions for wormhole formation in carbonate porous media: Influence of
      transport and reaction. SPE J 4:196–205
Galíndez JM, Molinero J, Samper J, Yang CB (2006) Simulating concr degradation processes by reactive transport
      models. J Phys (Paris) IV (Proceedings) 136:177–188
Gao J, Xing H, Tian Z, Pearce JK, Sedek M, Golding SD, Rudolph V (2017) Reactive transp porous media for CO2
      sequestration: Pore scale modeling using the lattice Boltzmann method. Comput Geosci 98:9–20
Garcia-Rios M, Luquot L, Soler JM, Cama J (2017) The role of mineral heterogeneity on the hydrogeochemical
      response of two fractured reservoir rocks in contact with dissolved CO2. Appl Geochem 84:202–17
Garing C, Gouze P, Kassab M, Riva M, Guadagnini A (2015) Anti-correlated porosity–permeability changes during
      the dissolution of carbonate rocks: experimental evidences and modeling. Transp Porous Media 107:595–621
Gaucher EC, Blanc P (2006) Cement/clay interactions–a review: experiments, natural analogues, and modeling.
      Waste Manage 26:776–788
Georget F, Prévost JH, Huet B (2018) Impact of the microstructure model on coupled simulation of drying and
      accelerated carbonation. Cem Concr Res 104:1–2
Gherardi F, Xu T, Pruess K (2007) Numerical modeling of self-limiting and self-enhancing caprock alteration induced
      by CO2 storage in a depleted gas reservoir. Chem Geol 244:103–129
Giger SB, Tenthorey E, Cox SF, Fitz Gerald JD (2007) Permeability evolution in quartz fault gouges under
      hydrothermal conditions. J Geophys Res: Solid Earth 112:B07202
Giles MR, Indrelid SL, Beynon GV, Amthor J (2000) The origin of large-scale quartz cementation: evidence from
      large data sets and coupled heat-fluid mass transport modelling. Spec Publ Int Assoc Sedimentol 29:21–38
Golfier F, Zarcone C, Bazin B, Lenormand R, Lasseux D, Quintard M (2002) On the ability of a Darcy-scale model to
      capture wormhole formation during the dissolution of a porous medium. J Fluid Mech 457:213–254
Gouze P, Coudrain-Ribstein A (2002) Chemical reactions and porosity changes during sedimentary diagenesis. Appl
      Geochem 17:39–47
Gouze P, Luquot L (2011) X-ray microtomography characterization of porosity, permeability and reactive surface
      changes during dissolution. J Contam Hydrol 120:45–55
Gray F, Anabaraonye B, Shah S, Boek E, Crawshaw J (2018) Chemical mechanisms of dissolution of calcite by HCl
      in porous media: Simulations and experiment. Adv Water Resour 121:369–387
Hammarstrom JM, Sibrell PL, Belkin HE (2003) Characterization of limestone reacted with acid-mine drainage in a
      pulsed limestone bed treatment system at the Friendship Hill National Historical Site, Pennsylvania, USA Appl
      Geochem 18:1705–1721
Hao L, Zhang S, Dong J, Ke W (2012) Evolution of corrosion of MnCuP weathering steel submitted to wet/dry cyclic
      tests in a simulated coastal atmosphere. Corrosion Sci 58:175–180
Hao Y, Smith M, Sholokhova Y, Carroll S (2013) CO2-induced dissolution of low permeability carbonates. Part II:
      Numerical modeling of experiments. Adv Water Resour 62:388–408
Harrison AL, Dipple GM, Power IM, Mayer KU (2016) The impact of evolving mineral–water–gas interfacial areas
      on mineral–fluid reaction rates in unsaturated porous media. Chem Geol 421:65–80
Harrison AL, Dipple GM, Song W, Power IM, Mayer KU, Beinlich A, Sinton D (2017) Changes in mineral reactivity
      driven by pore fluid mobility in partially wetted porous media. Chem Geol 463:1–11
Hartmann A, Goldscheider N, Wagener T, Lange J, Weiler M (2014) Karst water resources in a changing world:
      Review of hydrological modeling approaches. Rev Geophys 52:218–242
Hazen TC, Fliermans CB (1995) Bioremediation of contaminated groundwater. Google Patents
Henderson TH, Mayer KU, Parker BL, Al TA (2009) Three-dimensional density-dependent flow and multicomponent reactive
      transport modeling of chlorinated solvent oxidation by potassium permanganate. J Contam Hydrol 106:195–211
Herbert H-J, Kasbohm J, Sprenger H, Fernández AM, Reichelt C (2008) Swelling pressures of MX-80 bentonite in
      solutions of different ionic strength. Phys Chem Earth, Parts A/B/C 33, S327–S342
Hesse MA, Strazisar BR, Bryant SL, Wenning QC, Huerta NJ, Lopano CL (2013) Development of reacted channel
      during flow of CO2 Rich Water Along a Cement Fracture. Energy Procedia 37:5692–5701
Hoefner ML, Fogler HS (1988) Pore evolution and channel formation during flow and reaction in porous media.
      AIChE J 34:45–54
Hommel J, Coltman E, Class H (2018) Porosity–permeability relations for evolving pore space: a review with a focus
      on (bio-) geochemically altered porous media. Transp Porous Media 124:589–629
234                                                Seigneur et al.

Houben GJ (2003) Iron oxide incrustations in wells. Part 1: genesis, mineralogy and geochemistry. Appl Geochem 18:927–939
Huber C, Shafei B, Parmigiani A (2014) A new pore-scale model for linear and non-linear heterogeneous dissolution
      and precipitation. Geochim Cosmochim Acta 124:109–130
Huet BM, Prevost JH, Scherer GW (2010) Quantitative reactive transport modeling of Portland cement in CO2-
      saturated water. Int J Greenhouse Gas Control 4:561–574
Ivanov V, Chu J (2008) Applications of microorganisms to geotechnical engineering for bioclogging and
      biocementation of soil in situ. Rev Environ Sci Bio/Technol 7:139–153
Jaboyedoff M, Baillifard F, Bardou E, Girod F (2004) The effect of weathering on Alpine rock instability. Q J Eng
      Geol Hydrogeol 37:95–103
Jacquemet N, Pironon J, Lagneau V, Saint-Marc J (2012) Armouring of well cement in H2S–CO2 saturated brine by
      calcite coating–Experiments and numerical modelling. Appl Geochem 27:782–795
Jeen SW, Mayer KU, Gillham RW, Blowes DW (2007) Reactive transport modeling of trichloroethene treatment with
      declining reactivity of iron. Environ Sci Technol 41:1432–1438
Jenni A, Gimmi T, Alt-Epping P, Mäder U, Cloet V (2017) Interaction of ordinary Portland cement and Opalinus Clay:
      Dual porosity modelling compared to experimental data. Phys Chem Earth, Parts A/B/C 99:22–37
Jin L, Mathur R, Rother G, Cole D, Bazilevskaya E, Williams J, Carone A, Brantley S (2013) Evolution of porosity
      and geochemistry in Marcellus Formation black shale during weathering. Chem Geol 356:50–63
Johnson RH, Blowes DW, Robertson WD, Jambor JL (2000) The hydrogeochemistry of the Nickel Rim mine tailings
      impoundment, Sudbury, Ontario. J Contam Hydrol 41:49–80
Jung H, Navarre-Sitchler A (2018) Physical heterogeneity control on effective mineral dissolution rates. Geochim
      Cosmochim Acta 15:246–63
Kang Q, Tsimpanogiannis IN, Zhang D, Lichtner PC (2005) Numerical modeling of pore-scale phenomena during
      CO2 sequestration in oceanic sediments. Fuel Process Technol 86:1647–1665
Kaszuba JP, Janecky DR, Snow MG (2005) Experimental evaluation of mixed fluid reactions between supercritical carbon
      dioxide and NaCl brine: Relevance to the integrity of a geologic carbon repository. Chem Geol 217:277–293
Kaufmann G, Romanov D, Hiller T (2010) Modeling three-dimensional karst aquifer evolution using different matrix-
      flow contributions. J Hydrol 388:241–250
Kim DS, Fogler HS (2000) Biomass evolution in porous media and its effects on permeability under starvation
      conditions. Biotechnol Bioeng 69:47–56
Knackstedt M, Zhang X (1994) Direct evaluation of length scales and structural parameters associated with flow in
      porous media. Phys Rev E 50:2134
Koponen A, Kataja M, Timonen J (1997) Permeability and effective porosity of porous media. Phys Rev E 56:3319
Kutchko BG, Strazisar BR, Dzombak DA, Lowry GV, Thaulow N (2007) Degradation of well cement by CO2 under
      geologic sequestration conditions. Environ Sci Technol 41:4787–4792
Lagneau V, Van Der Lee J (2010) Operator-splitting-based reactive transport models in strong feedback of porosity change: The
      contribution of analytical solutions for accuracy validation and estimator improvement. J Contam Hydrol 112:118–129
Lai P, Krevor S (2014) Pore scale heterogeneity in the mineral distribution and surface area of Berea sandstone.
      Energy Procedia 63:3582–3588
Lalan P (2016) Influence d’une température de 70°C sur la géochimie, la microstructure et la diffusion aux interfaces
      béton/argile : expérimentations en laboratoire in situ et modélisation. (PhD Thesis). PSL Research University
Landrot G, Ajo-Franklin JB, Yang L, Cabrini S, Steefel CI (2012) Measurement of accessible reactive surface area in
      a sandstone, with application to CO2 mineralization. Chem Geol 318:113–125
Lasaga AC (1981) Transition state theory. Rev Mineral 8:135–170
Lasaga AC (2014) Kinetic Theory in the Earth Sciences. Princeton University Press
Le Gallo Y, Bildstein O, Brosse E (1998) Coupled reaction-flow modeling of diagenetic changes in reservoir
      permeability, porosity and mineral compositions. J Hydrol 209:366–388
Lefebvre R, Hockley D, Smolensky J, Gélinas P (2001) Multiphase transfer processes in waste rock piles producing
      acid mine drainage: 1: Conceptual model and system characterization. J Contam Hydrol 52:137–164
Levenspiel O (1998) Chemical Reaction Engineering Book, 3rd edn., Chap. 9 and 10. John Wiley and Sons, New York
Li L, Benson CH, Lawson EM (2006) Modeling porosity reductions caused by mineral fouling in continuous-wall
      permeable reactive barriers. J Contam Hydrol 83:89–121
Li L, Steefel CI, Yang L (2008) Scale dependence of mineral dissolution rates within single pores and fractures.
      Geochim Cosmochim Acta 72:360–377
Li X, Huang H, Meakin P (2008) Level set simulation of coupled advection–diffusion and pore structure evolution due
      to mineral precipitation in porous media. Water Resour Res 44:W12407
Li X, Huang H, Meakin P (2010) A three-dimensional level set simulation of coupled reactive transport and
      precipitation/dissolution. Int J Heat Mass Transfer 53:2908–2923
Li Q, Steefel CI, Jun Y-S (2017) Incorporating nanoscale effects into a continuum-scale reactive transport model for
      CO2-deteriorated cement. Environ Sci Technol 51:10861–10871
Lichtner PC (1996) Continuum formulation of multicomponent-multiphase reactive transport. Rev Mineral 34:1–82
Liu J, Aruguete DM, Jinschek JR, Rimstidt JD, Hochella Jr MF (2008) The non-oxidative dissolution of galena
      nanocrystals: Insights into mineral dissolution rates as a function of grain size, shape, and aggregation state.
      Geochim Cosmochim Acta 72:5984–5996
                           Reactive Transport in Evolving Porous Media                                               235

Low PF (1981) Principles of Ion Diffusion in Clays 1. In: Chemistry in the Soil Environment. Robert H. Dowdy (ed.)
      ASA Spec Publ 40, p 31–45
Luhmann AJ, Kong XZ, Tutolo BM, Garapati N, Bagley BC, Saar MO, Seyfried Jr WE (2014) Experimental
      dissolution of dolomite by CO2-charged brine at 100 C and 150 bar: Evolution of porosity, permeability, and
      reactive surface area. Chem Geol 25:145–60
Luquot L, Gouze P (2009) Experimental determination of porosity and permeability changes induced by injection of
      CO2 into carbonate rocks. Chem Geol 265:148–159
Luquot L, Abdoulghafour H, Gouze P (2013) Hydro-dynamically controlled alteration of fractured Portland cements
      flowed by CO2-rich brine. Int J Greenhouse Gas Control 16:167–79
Luquot L, Rodriguez O, Gouze P (2014) Experimental characterization of porosity structure and transport property
      changes in limestone undergoing different dissolution regimes. Transp Porous Media 101:507–532
Luquot L, Gouze P, Niemi A, Bensabat J, Carrera J (2016) CO2-rich brine percolation experiments through Heletz reservoir
      rock samples (Israel): Role of the flow rate and brine composition. Int J Greenhouse Gas Control 48:44–58
MacQuarrie KTB, Mayer KU (2005) Reactive transport modeling in fractured rock: A state-of-the-science review.
      Earth Sci Rev 72:189–227
Mainguy M, Tognazzi C, Torrenti JM, Adenot F (2000) Modelling of leaching in pure cement paste and mortar.
      Cement Concr Res 30:83–90
Maxwell JC (1881) A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism, Clarendon. Oxford
Mayer KU, Frind EO, Blowes DW (2002) Multicomponent reactive transport modeling in variably saturated porous
      media using a generalized formulation for kinetically controlled reactions. Water Resour Res 38:1174
McDuff D, Shuchart CE, Jackson S, Postl D, Brown JS (2010) Understanding wormholes in carbonates: Unprecedented
      experimental scale and 3-D visualization. In: SPE Ann Tech Conf Exhibition. Soc Petrol Eng
Mehmani Y, Sun T, Balhoff MT, Eichhubl P, Bryant S (2012) Multiblock pore-scale modeling and upscaling of
      reactive transport: application to carbon sequestration. Transp Porous Media 95:305–326
Meinert LD, Hedenquist JW, Satoh H, Matsuhisa Y (2003) Formation of anhydrous and hydrous skarn in Cu-Au ore
      deposits by magmatic fluids. Econ Geol 98:147–156
Menke HP, Andrew MG, Blunt MJ, Bijeljic B (2016) Reservoir condition imaging of reactive transport in heterogeneous
      carbonates using fast synchrotron tomography—Effect of initial pore structure and flow conditions. Chem Geol 15:15–26
Millington RJ (1959) Gas diffusion in porous media. Science 10:3367
Millington RJ, Quirk JP (1961) Permeability of porous solids. Trans Faraday Soc 57:1200–7
Min T, Gao Y, Chen L, Kang Q, Tao WW (2016) Changes in porosity, permeability and surface area during rock
      dissolution: Effects of mineralogical heterogeneity. Inter J Heat Mass Transfer 103:900–913
Mok U, Bernabé Y, Evans B (2002) Permeability, porosity and pore geometry of chemically altered porous silica
      glass. J Geophys Res: Solid Earth 107:ECV–4
Molins S (2015) Reactive interfaces in direct numerical simulation of pore-scale processes. Rev Mineral Geochem 80:461–481
Molins S, Trebotich D, Steefel CI, Shen C (2012). An investigation of the effect of pore scale flow on average geochemical
      reaction rates using direct numerical simulation. Water Resour Res 48:W03527
Molins S, Trebotich D, Yang L, Ajo-Franklin JB, Ligocki TJ, Shen C, Steefel CI (2014) Pore-scale controls on calcite
      dissolution rates from flow-through laboratory and numerical experiments. Environ Sci Technol 48:7453–7460
Molins S, Trebotich D, Miller GH, Steefel CI (2017) Mineralogical and transport controls on the evolution of porous
      media texture using direct numerical simulation. Water Resour Res 53:3645–3661
Molins S, Trebotich D, Arora B, Steefel CI, Deng H (2019) Multi-scale model of reactive transport in fractured media:
      diffusion limitations on rates. Transp Porous Media 128:701–721
Moreira EA, Coury JR (2004) The influence of structural parameters on the permeability of ceramic foams. Brazilian
      J Chem Eng 21:23–33
Navarre-Sitchler A, Steefel CI, Yang L, Tomutsa L, Brantley SL (2009) Evolution of porosity and diffusivity associated
      with chemical weathering of a basalt clast. J Geophys Res Earth Surf 114:F02016
Navarre-Sitchler A, Steefel CI, Sak PB, Brantley SL (2011) A reactive-transport model for weathering rind formation
      on basalt. Geochim Cosmochim Acta 75:7644–7667
Nelson MD, Parker BL, Al TA, Cherry JA, Loomer D (2001) Geochemical reactions resulting from in situ oxidation
      of PCE-DNAPL by KMnO4 in a sandy aquifer. Environ Sci Technol 35:1266–1275
Neuman SP (1973) Saturated-unsaturated seepage by finite elements. J Hydraul Div 99:2233-2250
Nogues JP, Fitts JP, Celia MA, Peters CA (2013) Permeability evolution due to dissolution and precipitation of
      carbonates using reactive transport modelin in pore networks. Water Resour Res 49:6006-21
Noiriel C (2015) Resolving time-dependent evolution of pore-scale structure, permeability and reactivity using X-ray
      microtomography. Rev Mineral Geochem 80:247–285
Noiriel C, Luquot L, Madé B, Raimbault L, Gouze P, Van Der Lee J (2009) Changes in reactive surface area during
      limestone dissolution: An experimental and modelling study. Chem Geol 265:160–170
Noiriel C, Renard F, Doan M-L, Gratier J-P (2010) Intense fracturing and fracture sealing induced by mineral growth
      in porous rocks. Chem Geol 269:197–209
Noiriel C, Steefel CI, Yang L, Ajo-Franklin J (2012) Upscaling calcium carbonate precipitation rates from pore to
      continuum scale. Chem Geol 318:60–74
Opfergelt S, Delmelle P, Boivin P, Delvaux B (2006) The 1998 debris avalanche at Casita volcano, Nicaragua:
      Investigation of the role of hydrothermal smectite in promoting slope instability. Geophys Res Lett 33:L15305
236                                               Seigneur et al.

Opolot E, Finke P (2015) Evaluating sensitivity of silicate mineral dissolution rates to physical weathering using a soil
      evolution model (SoilGen2. 25). BioGeosciences 12:6791–6808
Oron AP, Berkowitz B (1998) Flow in rock fractures: The local cubic law assumption reexamined. Water Resour Res
      34:2811–2825
Ortoleva P, Chadam J, Merino E, Sen A (1987) Geochemical self-organization II; the reactive-infiltration instability.
      Am J Sci 287:1008–1040
Ouellet S, Bussière B, Mbonimpa M, Benzaazoua M, Aubertin M (2006) Reactivity and mineralogical evolution of
      an underground mine sulphidic cemented paste backfill. Mineral Eng 19:407–419
Ovaysi S, Piri M (2014) Pore-space alteration induced by brine acidification in subsurface geologic formations. Water
      Resour Res 50:440–452
Panday S, Huyakorn PS, Therrien R, Nichols RL (1993) Improved three-dimensional finite-element techniques for
      field simulation of variably saturated flow and transport. J Contam Hydrol 12:3–33
Panga MK, Ziauddin M, Balakotaiah V (2005) Two-scale continuum model for simulation of wormholes in carbonate
      acidization. AIChE J 51:3231–48
Pape H, Clauser C, Iffland J (1998) Permeability prediction for reservoir sandstones and basement rocks based on fractal
      pore space geometry. In: SEG Technical Program Expanded Abstracts (1998) Soc Explor Geophys, pp. 1032–1035
Pape H, Clauser C, Iffland J, Krug R, Wagner R (2005) Anhydrite cementation and compaction in geothermal
      reservoirs: Interaction of pore-space structure with flow, transport, P–T conditions, and chemical reactions. Int
      J Rock Mech Min Sci 42:1056–1069
Pereira Nunes JP, Bijeljic B, Blunt MJ (2016) Pore-space structure and average dissolution rates: A simulation study.
      Water Resour Res 52:7198–7212
Peters CA (2009) Accessibilities of reactive minerals in consolidated sedimentary rock: An imaging study of three
      sandstones. Chem Geol 265:198–208
Petersen EE (1958) Diffusion in a pore of varying cross section. AIChE Journal 4:343–5
Pfingsten W (2002) Experimental and modeling indications for self-sealing of a cementitious low-and intermediate-
      level waste repository by calcite precipitation. Nucl Technol 140:63–82
Phillips AJ, Cunningham AB, Gerlach R, Hiebert R, Hwang C, Lomans BP, Westrich J, Mantilla C, Kirksey J,
      Esposito R, Spangler L (2016) Fracture sealing with microbially-induced calcium carbonate precipitation: A
      field study. Environ Sci Technol 50:4111–4117
Polak A, Elsworth D, Yasuhara H, Grader AS, Halleck PM (2003) Permeability reduction of a natural fracture under
      net dissolution by hydrothermal fluids. Geophys Res Lett 30:2020
Poonoosamy J, Kosakowski G, Van Loon LR, Mäder U (2015) Dissolution–precipitation processes in tank experiments for
      testing numerical models for reactive transport calculations: Experiments and modelling. J Contam Hydrol 177:1–17
Poonoosamy J, Curti E, Kosakowski G, Grolimund D, Van Loon LR, Mäder U (2016) Barite precipitation following celestite
      dissolution in a porous medium: A SEM/BSE and µ-XRD/XRF study. Geochim Cosmochim Acta 182:131–144
Poonoosamy J, Wanner C, Epping PA, Águila JF, Samper J, Montenegro L, Xie M, Su D, Mayer KU, Mäder U,
      Van Loon LR (2018) Benchmarking of reactive transport codes for 2D simulations with mineral dissolution–
      precipitation reactions and feedback on transport parameters. Comput Geosci 1–22
Putnis A, Mauthe G (2001) The effect of pore size on cementation in porous rocks. Geofluids 1:37–41
Quintard M, Lasseux D, Zarcone C, Golfier F, Lernormand R, Bazin B (2007) Acidizing carbonate reservoirs:
      numerical modelling of wormhole propagation and comparison to experiments, In: SPE European Formation
      Damage Conference
Raines MA, Dewers TA (1997) Mixed transport/reaction control of gypsum dissolution kinetics in aqueous solutions
      and initiation of gypsum karst. Chem Geol 140:29–48
Rajyaguru A, L’Hôpital E, Savoye S, Wittebroodt C, Bildstein O, Arnoux P, Detilleux V, Fatnassi I, Gouze P, Lagneau
      V (2019) Experimental characterization of coupled diffusion reaction mechanisms in low permeability chalk.
      Chem Geol 5:29–39
Ray N, Rupp A, Schulz R, Knabner P (2018) Old and new approaches predicting the diffusion in porous media.
      Transp Porous Media 124:803–824
Regmi AD, Yoshida K, Dhital MR, Devkota K (2013) Effect of rock weathering, clay mineralogy, and geological
      structures in the formation of large landslide, a case study from Dumre Besei landslide, Lesser Himalaya Nepal.
      Landslides 10:1–13
Regnault O, Lagneau V, Fiet N (2015) 3D reactive transport simulations of uranium in situ leaching: Forecast and
      process optimization, In: Uranium-Past and Future Challenges, p 725–730
Ritchie AIM (1994) Sulfide oxidation mechanisms: controls and rates of oxygen transport, in short course handbook
      on environmental geochemistry of sulfide mine-wastes. Waterloo, Canada: Mineral Assoc Can
Ritter WF, Scarborough RW (1995) A review of bioremediation of contaminated soils and groundwater. J Environ Sci
      Health Part A 30:333–357
Rötting TS, Thomas RC, Ayora C, Carrera J (2008) Passive treatment of acid mine drainage with high metal
      concentrations using dispersed alkaline substrate. J Environ Qual 37:1741–1751
Rötting TS, Luquot L, Carrera J, Casalinuovo DJ (2015) Changes in porosity, permeability, water retention curve and
      reactive surface area during carbonate rock dissolution. Chem Geol 18:86–98
                           Reactive Transport in Evolving Porous Media                                             237

Saripalli KP, Serne RJ, Meyer PD, McGrail BP (2002) Prediction of diffusion coefficients in porous media using
      tortuosity factors based on interfacial areas. Groundwater 40:346–352
Sato H, Shibutani T, Yui M (1997) Experimental and modelling studies on diffusion of Cs, Ni and Sm in granodiorite,
      basalt and mudstone. J Contam Hydrol 26:119–133
Savage D (2013) Constraints on cement-clay interaction. Procedia Earth Planet Sci 7:770–773
Scherer MM, Richter S, Valentine RL, Alvarez PJJ (2000) Chemistry and microbiology of permeable reactive barriers
      for in situ groundwater clean up. Crit Rev Microbiol 26:221–264
Sedighi M, Thomas HR (2014) Micro porosity evolution in compacted swelling clays—A chemical approach. Appl
      Clay Sci 101:608–618
Seigneur N, L’Hôpital E, Dauzères A, Sammaljärvi J, Voutilainen M, Labeau PE, Dubus A, Detilleux V (2017)
      Transport properties evolution of cement model system under degradation—Incorporation of a pore-scale
      approach into reactive transport modelling. Phys Chem Earth 99:95–109
Seigneur N, Lagneau V, Corvisier J, Dauzères A (2018) Recoupling flow and chemistry in variably saturated reactive
      transport modelling-An algorithm to accurately couple the feedback of chemistry on water consumption,
      variable porosity and flow. Adv Water Resour 122:355-366
Shao H, Kosakowski G, Berner U, Kulik DA, Mäder U, Kolditz O (2013) Reactive transport modeling of the clogging
      process at Maqarin natural analogue site. Phys Chem Earth, Parts A/B/C 64:21–31
Simon RB, Thiry M, Schmitt JM, Lagneau V, Langlais V, Bélières M (2014) Kinetic reactive transport modelling of
      column tests for uranium In Situ Recovery (ISR) mining. Appl Geochem 51:116–129
Sin I, Lagneau V, Corvisier J (2017) Integrating a compressible multicomponent two-phase flow into an existing
      reactive transport simulator. Adv Water Resour 100:62–77
Singurindy O, Berkowitz B (2003) Evolution of hydraulic conductivity by precipitation and dissolution in carbonate
      rock. Water Resour Res 39:1016
Smith L, Sego DC, Langman JB, Blowes DW, Wilson D, Amos RT (2018) Diavik Waste Rock Project: Scale-up of
      a reactive transport model for temperature and sulfide-content dependent geochemical evolution of waste rock.
      Appl Geochem 96:177–190
Smith MM, Sholokhova Y, Hao Y, Carroll SA (2013) CO2-induced dissolution of low permeability carbonates. Part I:
      Characterization and experiments. Adv Water Resour 62:370–387
Soleimani E, Moradzadeh A, Ansari Jafari M, Jodieri Shokri B, Doulati Ardejani F (2013) A combined mathematical
      geophysical model for prediction of pyrite oxidation and pollutant leaching associated with a coal washing waste
      dump. Int J Environ Sci Technol 5:517–526
Soler JM, Mäder UK (2005) Interaction between hyperalkaline fluids and rocks hosting repositories for radioactive
      waste: reactive transport simulations. Nucl Sci Eng 151:128–133
Soulaine C, Tchelepi HA (2016) Micro-continuum approach for pore-scale simulation of subsurface processes.
      Transp Porous Media 113:431–456
Spycher NF, Sonnenthal EL, Apps JA (2003) Fluid flow and reactive transport around potential nuclear waste
      emplacement tunnels at Yucca Mountain, Nevada. J Contam Hydrol 62:653–673
Steefel CI, Lasaga AC (1992) Putting transport into water-rock interaction models. Geology 20:680–684
Steefel CI, Lasaga AC (1994) A coupled model for transport of multiple chemical species and kinetic precipitation/
      dissolution reactions with application to reactive flow in single phase hydrothermal systems. Am J Sci 294:529–592
Steefel CI, Maher K (2009) Fluid-rock interaction: A reactive transport approach. Rev Mineral Geochem 70:485–532
Steefel CI, Lichtner PC (1994) Diffusion and reaction in rock matrix bordering a hyperalkaline fluid-filled fracture.
      Geochim Cosmochim Acta 58:3595–3612
Steefel CI, Lichtner PC (1998) Multicomponent reactive transport in discrete fractures: II: Infiltration of hyperalkaline
      groundwater at Maqarin, Jordan, a natural analogue site. J Hydrol 209:200–224
Steefel CI, Molins S, Trebotich D (2013) Pore scale processes associated with subsurface CO2 injection and
      sequestration. Rev Mineral Geochem 77:259–303
Steefel CI, Appelo CA, Arora B, Jacques D, Kalbacher T, Kolditz O, Lagneau V, Lichtner PC, Mayer KU, Meeussen JC,
      Molins S (2015a) Reactive transport codes for subsurface environmental simulation. Comput Geosci 19:445–478
Steefel CI, Beckingham LE, Landrot G (2015b) Micro-continuum approaches for modeling pore-scale geochemical
      processes. Rev Mineral Geochem 80:217–246
Suazo G, Fourie A, Doherty J (2016) Experimental study of the evolution of the soil water retention curve for granular
      material undergoing cement hydration. J Geotech Geoenviron Eng 142:04016022
Tartakovsky AM, Meakin P, Scheibe TD, Wood BD (2007) A smoothed particle hydrodynamics model for reactive
      transport and mineral precipitation in porous and fractured porous media. Water Resour Res 43:W05437
Tartakovsky AM, Redden G, Lichtner PC, Scheibe TD, Meakin P (2008) Mixing-induced precipitation: Experimental
      study and multiscale numerical analysis. Water Resour Res 44:W06S04
Taylor HFW, Famy C, Scrivener KL (2001) Delayed ettringite formation. Cement and concr research 31:683–693
Teng HH (2004) Controls by saturation state on etch pit formation during calcite dissolution. Geochim Cosmochim
      Acta 68:253–262
Tenthorey E, Gerald JDF (2006) Feedbacks between deformation, hydrothermal reaction and permeability evolution
      in the crust: Experimental insights. Earth Planet Sci Lett 247:117–129
238                                                Seigneur et al.

Thullner M, Zeyer J, Kinzelbach W (2002) Influence of microbial growth on hydraulic properties of pore networks.
      Transp Porous Media 49:99–122
Tian Z, Wang J (2018) Lattice Boltzmann simulation of dissolution-induced changes in permeability and porosity in
      3D CO2 reactive transport. J Hydrol 557:276–290
Tian H, Xu T, Wang F, Patil VV, Sun Y, Yue G (2014) A numerical study of mineral alteration and self-sealing
      efficiency of a caprock for CO2 geological storage. Acta Geotechnica 9:87–100
Tomadakis MM, Sotirchos SV (1993) Transport properties of random arrays of freely overlapping cylinders with
      various orientation distributions. J Chem Phys 98:616–626
Trebotich D, Adams MF, Molins S, Steefel CI, Shen C (2014) High-resolution simulation of pore-scale reactive
      transport processes associated with carbon sequestration. Comput Sci Eng 16:22–31
Van der Land C, Wood R, Wu K, van Dijke MIJ, Jiang Z, Corbett PWM, Couples G (2013) Modelling the permeability
      evolution of carbonate rocks. Mar Petrol Geol 48:1–7
Verma A, Pruess K (1988) Thermohydrological conditions and silica redistribution near high-level nuclear wastes
      emplaced in saturated geological formations. J Geophys Res: Solid Earth 93:1159–1173
Vialle S, Contraires S, Zinzsner B, Clavaud JB, Mahiouz K, Zuddas P, Zamora M (2014) Percolation of CO2-rich
      fluids in a limestone sample: Evolution of hydraulic, electrical, chemical, and structural properties. J Geophys
      Res Solid Earth 119:2828–2847
Vilcáez J, Morad S, Shikazono N (2017) Pore-scale simulation of transport properties of carbonate rocks using FIB-
      SEM 3D microstructure: Implications for field scale solute transport simulations. J Nat Gas Sci Eng 42:13–22
Walsh JB, Brace WF (1984) The effect of pressure on porosity and the transport properties of rock. J Geophys Res:
      Solid Earth 89:9425–9431
Walsh SDC, Du Frane WL, Mason HE, Carroll SA (2013) Permeability of wellbore-cement fractures following
      degradation by carbonated brine. Rock Mech Rock Eng 46:455–464
Wang Y, Hill AD, Schechter RS (1993) The optimum injection rate for matrix acidizing of carbonate formations. In:
      SPE Annual Technical Conference and Exhibition. Soc Petrol Eng
Wang Y, Nahon D, Merino E (1994) Dynamic model of the genesis of calcretes replacing silicate rocks in semi-arid
      regions. Geochim Cosmochim Acta 58:5131–5145
Wang Q, Cui Y-J, Tang AM, Delage P, Gatmiri B, Ye W-M (2014) Long-term effect of water chemistry on the swelling
      pressure of a bentonite-based material. Appl Clay Sci 87:157–162
Wantanaphong J, Mooney SJ, Bailey EH (2006) Quantification of pore clogging characteristics in potential permeable
      reactive barrier (PRB) substrates using image analysis. J Contam Hydrol 86:299–320
Watanabe N, Yonekura N, Sagara W, Cheibany OE, Marui H, Furuya G (2005) Chemical weathering and the occurrence
      of large-scale landslides in the Hime River Basin, Central Japan, In: Landslides. Springer, pp. 165–171
Werth CJ, Zhang C, Brusseau ML, Oostrom M, Baumann T (2010) A review of non-invasive imaging methods and
      applications in contaminant hydrogeology research. J Contam Hydrol 113:1–24
White AF, Schulz MS, Vivit DV, Blum AE, Stonestrom DA, Harden JW (2005) Chemical weathering rates of a soil
      chronosequence on granitic alluvium: III Hydrochemical evolution and contemporary solute fluxes and rates.
      Geochim Cosmochim Acta 69:1975–1996
Witherspoon PA, Wang JS, Iwai K, Gale JE (1980) Validity of cubic law for fluid flow in a deformable rock fracture.
      Water Resour Res 16:1016–1024
Wolterbeek TK, Raoof A (2018) Meter-scale reactive transport modeling of CO2-rich fluid flow along debonded
      wellbore casing-cement interfaces. Environ Sci Technol 52:3786–3795
Wunderly MD, Blowes DW, Frind EO, Ptacek CJ (1996) Sulfide mineral oxidation and subsequent reactive transport of
      oxidation products in mine tailings impoundments: A numerical model. Water Resour Res 32:3173–87
Xiao Y, Jones GD (2007) Reactive transport models of limestone-dolomite transitions: implications for reservoir
      connectivity, In: Int Petrol Technol Conf
Xie M, Mayer KU, Claret F, Alt-Epping P, Jacques D, Steefel C, Chiaberge C, Simunek J (2015) Implementation
      and evaluation of permeability–porosity and tortuosity–porosity relationships linked to mineral dissolution–
      precipitation. Comput Geosci 19:655–671
Xu P, Yu B (2008) Developing a new form of permeability and Kozeny–Carman constant for homogeneous porous
      media by means of fractal geometry. Adv Water Resour 31:74–81
Xu T, Spycher N, Sonnenthal E, Zhang G, Zheng L, Pruess K (2011) TOUGHREACT Version 2.0: A simulator
      for subsurface reactive transport under non-isothermal multiphase flow conditions. Compu Geosci 37:763–774
Yang C, Samper J, Montenegro L (2008) A coupled non-isothermal reactive transport model for long-term geochemical
      evolution of a HLW repository in clay. Environ Geol 53:1627–1638
Zhang C-L (2011) Experimental evidence for self-sealing of fractures in claystone. Phys Chem Earth, Parts A/B/C 36:1972–1980
Zhang C-L (2013) Sealing of fractures in claystone. J Rock Mech Geotech Eng 5:214–220
Zhang YD, Park JS, Gao S, Sonta A, Horin B, Buscarnera G (2017) Effect of grain crushing and grain size on the
      evolution of water retention curves, In: PanAm Unsaturated Soils, p 268–278
