Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
Earth & Environmental Sciences

Title
Upscaling calcium carbonate precipitation rates from pore to continuum scale

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8272c5b5

Journal
Chemical Geology, 2012

Author
Noiriel, C.

Publication Date
2012-07-01


Peer reviewed




 eScholarship.org                                Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                 University of California
Upscaling Calcium Carbonate Precipitation Rates from Pore to Continuum Scale

Catherine Noiriel 1,2, Carl I. Steefel 2,*, Li Yang 2 , Jonathan Ajo-Franklin 2
1
    Géosciences Environnement Toulouse, UMR 5533 Université Paul Sabatier/CNRS/IRD/CNES, 31400

Toulouse, France
2
    Earth Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720



Catherine Noiriel

Géosciences Environnement Toulouse

UMR 5533 Université Paul Sabatier/CNRS/IRD/CNES

14, avenue Edouard Belin

31400 Toulouse, France catherine.noiriel@get.obs-mip.fr (Tel: +33 5 61 33 25 68; Fax +33 5 61 33 25

60)




Carl Steefel* (corresponding author)      CISteefel@lbl.gov

Li Yang                                   lyang@lbl.gov

Jonathan Ajo-Franklin                     JBAjo-Franklin@lbl.gov

Earth Sciences Division

Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory

1 Cyclotron Road, Mail Stop 90-1116, Berkeley, CA 94720.
Abstract

   The upscaling of calcite precipitation rates in porous media from the pore (micron) to continuum

(centimeter) scale is evaluated with an integrated experimental and modeling approach. Experiments

using cylindrical cores packed with glass beads and calcite (Iceland spar) crystals were injected over a

period of 28 days with a supersaturated mixture of CaCl2 and NaHCO3 to induce calcite growth. Bulk

rates of precipitation based on the change in aqueous chemistry over the length of the column are

compared with spatially resolved determinations of carbonate precipitation using X-ray synchrotron

microtomographic imaging at the micron scale. These data are supplemented by continuously-stirred

reactor experiments using the same calcite seed material so as to minimize differences in the effects of

reactive site density of the seed material, and to evaluate the rate of precipitation in the absence of

transport or “porous medium” effects. Calcite precipitation rates determined in the stirred flowthrough

reactor in this study are considerably slower than rates determined at similar supersaturation in unseeded

batch experiments by Tang et al. [2008a], although these rates are compatible with those reported in

Nehrke et al. [2007] for precipitation on Iceland spar when the same normalization to reactive surface

area is used. The nearly linear dependence of the rates on supersaturation cannot be attributed to a

diffusion control in the case of the stirred reactors and is likely the result of multi-sourced spiral growth.

Integrated precipitation rates based on column effluent chemistry from a higher supersaturation

experiment are in good agreement with determinations of total carbonate precipitated based on

determination of pre- and post-experiment mass in the column using X-ray microtomography. Using the

rates of precipitation determined in the well-stirred flowthrough reactors, it is possible to match the

spatially-resolved microtomographic and aqueous data with a coarser resolution continuum model using

volume-averaged flow and reactive surface area if the generation of new reactive surface area is

accounted for. A nucleation or surface roughening event, which is most pronounced within two

millimeters of the column inlet where the supersaturation is highest, is recorded by both BET analysis,
which indicates an increase in specific surface area from 0.012 m2∙g-1 to a value of 0.21 m2∙g-1 for neo-

formed calcium carbonate, and by X-ray microtomography. The best fit of the column X-ray

microtomography data is provided by simulating calcite precipitation either as a single nearly linear rate

for multi-sourced spiral growth, or as two parallel rates that include the spiral growth model and a 2D

heterogeneous nucleation model modified by a partial diffusion control, although nucleation needs to be

relatively minor on a mass basis in order to match the data. The combined experiments and modeling

indicate that it is possible to develop upscaled quantitative models for porous media reactivity, but

changes in such properties as the reactive surface area need to be accounted for.



Keywords

     Calcite precipitation kinetics, reactive surface area, reactive transport, modeling, carbon dioxide, X-

ray microtomography.



1.    Introduction


     One of the most significant obstacles to understanding geochemical reactivity of natural subsurface

environments stems from the multitude of spatial scales that have to be considered. Geochemical

reactions like mineral precipitation take place ultimately at the molecular scale, but within pores that in

aggregate make up the materials we call rocks, sediments, or soils. Certainly part of the reported

discrepancy between laboratory-determined rates, which are typically measured on well defined mineral-

water surfaces in the absence of transport effects, and field rates is likely due to the special properties of

reactive porous media. Is it possible even to use laboratory-determined rates at all at the field scale? If it is

possible, what kind of volume-averaging approach is needed to relate the single mineral experiments in

the laboratory to the complex porous medium environment of the subsurface? Permeability is one very

important parameter that has been shown to be scale dependent (Gelhar [1986], Dagan [1988]), but

similar arguments can be made for mineral reactive surface area. The difficulty in characterizing volume-
averaged parameters like reactive surface area then potentially translates to questions about the

homogeneity of the reactive processes themselves. Does mineral precipitation take place uniformly within

the porous medium, or do gradients in precipitation rate, and thus aqueous chemistry, develop? It is

highly likely that they do, as demonstrated by such studies as those of Li et al. [2006]. Even at the single

pore scale, gradients may develop under certain conditions, although Li et al. [2008] demonstrated that for

typical groundwater flow rates, gradients within single pores were unlikely.

   One of the most important current challenges, given the complexity and range of coupled thermal,

hydrological, mechanical, and chemical processes involved, is to understand geochemical reactivity in the

case of long-term sequestration of carbon dioxide (CO2) in subsurface geological formations. Massive

injection of CO2 into subsurface reservoirs will perturb significantly the geochemical equilibrium between

rock-forming minerals and formation water. Initially, the injection of CO2 and the resulting generation of

an acidic brine phase will drive mineral dissolution primarily, but with addition of alkalinity and suitable

cations from the formation water and the dissolution of primarily minerals, precipitation of carbonates is

expected to occur.

   Several models have been proposed to describe rate of calcite precipitation based on affinity models of

surface-controlled crystallization (e.g. Aagaard and Helgeson [1982]). A general equation to describe the

rate of calcite precipitation is (Lasaga [1981]):

                                                                 n
                             m ∆G  
                                         n
                                                    
                                                        m
                                                             
                                   
                 R ppt = k exp *  − 1 = k 
                                               
                                                 IAP  
                                                      
                                               K sp 
                                                          − 1 = k Ω m − 1
                                                             
                                                                       (   n
                                                                               )        (1)
                             R T                      


with k the rate constant (mol∙m-2∙s-1), ∆G the Gibbs free energy change of the overall reaction (J∙mol-1),

Ω the saturation index ( Ω = IAP / K sp ), Ksp the solubility of calcite, IAP the ion activity product defined

                                                                                   2−
by IAP = a Ca 2 + a CO 2 − , with aCa 2+ and a CO 2 − the activities of Ca 2+ and CO3 , respectively, R* the gas
                     3                       3




constant (J∙K-1∙mol-1) and T the absolute temperature (K). The value of n and m are semi-empirical

constants that depend on the kinetic behavior involved in the chemical reaction, although m can be
interpreted as the Temkin coefficient relating the reaction stoichiometry in the rate limiting step to the

reaction stoichiometry of the overall reaction (Aagaard and Helgeson [1982], Oelkers et al. [1994], Tang

et al. [2008a]). For example, a value of n = 1 (linear rate law) has been attributed to crystallization limited

by adsorption of lattice ion (Nielsen [1984]), although it may also be ascribed to a rate controlled by

diffusion (e.g., Pokrovsky et al. [2005]) and in some cases to a multi-source spiral growth mechanism

(Teng et al. [2000]). A second order equation (n = 2) may be used to describe growth at single screw

dislocation by the spiral mechanism (Teng et al. [2000]), while high order dependences (n > 2) can be

applied to growth both at screw and edge dislocation (Blum and Lasaga [1987]) or growth by 2D

nucleation (Teng et al. [2000]). For example, Teng et al. [2000] observed on AFM images a transition

from spiral growth mechanism (observed at log Ω = 0.17) to two-dimensional surface nucleation

(observed at log Ω = 0.43 and log Ω = 0.69). Despite the different expressions that have been proposed,

these formulations share the concept of linking growth mechanisms to the saturation index (log Ω),

although Teng et al. [2000] provide a thoughtful commentary on the difficulties associated with linking

the reaction order uniquely to a single mechanism.

   Carbonate precipitation is important not only because it represents an important sequestration

mechanism for CO2, but also because it can modify the physical and chemical properties of the subsurface

medium. Pore clogging and the resulting reservoir injectivity decrease is certainly one such process that

can take place, but changes in reactivity are also possible as either primary minerals are passivated due to

coatings, or reactivity is enhanced as a result of the growth of new, high specific surface area reactive

material. In addition, the newly precipitated material may have a higher reactive site density than was

present on the original seed material. These effects, however, are presently poorly understood because of

the lack of detailed investigations at the pore scale.

   One possible approach to understanding the role of multi-scale processes in a complex enterprise like

subsurface CO2 injection, and perhaps even to address the lab-field rate discrepancy (White and Brantley

[2003]), is to investigate rates in an ideal system where physical and chemical heterogeneities, if present,
are minor (Steefel et al. [2005]). In this study, we began with continuously-stirred reactor experiments

using coarsely crystalline calcite (Iceland spar) to determine the rate of precipitation for this particular

material as a function of supersaturation. A thorough study of calcite precipitation kinetics is not within

the scope of this study, but it will likely be important to know the intrinsic reactivity of the material as

compared to other possible calcite seeds that may have a different reactive site density. As an ideal

representation of a porous medium, a column filled with a mixture of glass beads and Iceland spar grains

was packed and injected with a CaCl2-NaHCO3 mixture that is supersaturated with respect to calcite. The

bulk reactivity of grains in the column was evaluated through a combination of effluent chemistry and

reactive transport modeling, and these data were compared with X-ray microtomography imaging (XMT)

at the micron scale of pre- and post-experiment materials to quantify the mass of precipitate added to the

column. Of particular interest is the spatial distribution of reaction products and whether these can be

captured at the larger scale by a continuum model using volume-averaged rate constants.



2.    Materials and methods


2.1. Starting materials

     The stirred reactor experiments were carried out using crushed calcite spar crystals and the plug-flow

column experiments were conducted with the same crushed calcite spar crystals mixed with glass beads.

Photomicrographs of the materials are presented in Figure 1 and chemical composition is given in Table

1.

     Glass beads are acid-washed soda-lime glass of density 2.5 g∙cm-3 in the range 425-600 µm (Sigma

G8772). Calcite that began as centimeter-size crystals were crushed in an agate mortar and then sieved in

the range 355-500 µm. The initial specific surface area determined by multipoint krypton adsorption BET

method was 0.012 m2.g-1. Assuming an average grain size of about 425 µm for crushed calcite grains, a

spherical geometry would result in a geometric surface area of 0.005 m2∙g-1. The difference between the

spherical geometry and the measured value of 0.012 m2∙g-1 indicates a correction for geometry and
  roughness of approximately 2.303. An assumption of a rhombohedral geometry would yield a higher

  geometric estimate and therefore a value closer to the BET-determined surface area, but considering the

  range of grain sizes and the observations with SEM of surface roughness, we use the factor of 2.303 based

  on an ideal spherical geometry. All the materials were washed with deionized water, put into an ultrasonic

  bath to clean the surface and eliminate fine particles, and then dried in an oven at 50°C for several hours

  before being used in the experimental studies.


  2.2. Experimental procedure


  2.2.1. Continuously-stirred precipitation rate experiments

     So as to provide a base case for the plug-flow column experiments, flow through experiments seeded

  with the ground and sieved calcite spar crystals were conducted in continuously stirred reactors (CSTR)

  to determine the rate of calcite precipitation under chemical conditions similar to those of the plug-flow

  columns experiments, i.e. with a saturation index (log Ω) ranging from about 0.15 to 0.82.

     The stirred reactor experiments were carried out in 70 ml reactors at a total flow of 0.5 ml∙h-1, with

  separate streams of NaHCO3 and CaCl2 stock solutions pre-equilibrated with atmosphere and mixed

  directly in the reactor through two separate injection ports. The chemistry of the mixed injection solution

  was determined by collecting both streams in a sampling vessel while maintaining the same pump speed.

  The reactors have a suspended Teflon-coated stirring rod operated at a constant stirring rate of 800 RPM.

  Each of the experiments used an initial mass of calcite spar, minit, of 1 g as seed crystals.

     The specific surface area of newly crystallized calcium carbonate was determined by measuring the

  initial and final specific surface areas using a five point krypton gas BET method, with weighting based

  on the relative masses of initial and new precipitate according to:


                   minit                 m ppt
=SSAfin                      SSAin +               SSAppt                     (2)
               m ppt + minit         m ppt + minit
where SSAin and SSAfin are the initial and final specific surface areas determined with the BET method and

SSAppt is the specific surface area of the new precipitate calculated from Eq. 2 using the minit and mppt, the

initial and newly precipitated calcite mass, respectively (Table 2). This approach does not take into

account the details of the reactive site density and coverage of the surface, nor does it account for the fact

that epitaxial growth will likely generate little new surface area (this is discussed below in the context of

2D nucleation versus epitaxial growth). Thus, it simply represents an average of the surface area

associated with newly formed calcite.

   Calcium and sodium were determined in the injection solution and effluent by ICP-MS analysis after

acidification with nitric acid (pH < 2). pH was determined with an Orion pH electrode. Dissolved

Inorganic Carbon (DIC) was assumed to equal the sodium concentration in the injection solution, which

was prepared using reagent grade NaHCO3. In the effluent, DIC was estimated by assuming that the

stirred reactors behaved as closed systems in which calcium carbonate was the only phase precipitated

such that ΔCa = ΔDIC (Table 2). Saturation indexes for the well-mixed effluent were calculated with the

code CrunchFlow, which makes use of the EQ3 database (Wolery et al. [1990]). Activity coefficients are

calculated with the extended Debye-Hückel equation. Thermodynamic parameters at 22°C are included in

Table 3.

   Precipitation rates, R (mol∙m-2∙s-1), are determined by the difference between the concentration of

calcium determined in the effluent, Caout, and the well-mixed stock solution, Cain according to:

                    Ca out − Ca in
           R = −Q                                                           (3)
                           A

where Q is the volumetric flow rate (l∙s-1), and A is the total surface area (m2) in the reactor at steady state

calculated using the final mass of calcium carbonate and specific surface area in the reactor based on BET

measurement.
2.2.2. Plug-flow column precipitation experiments

   Three samples (REAC-0 to REAC-2) were prepared by packing different amounts of glass beads with

or without calcite crystals in cylindrical plug-flow column reactors of 6.50 mm diameter and of

approximately 12 mm length. The relative proportions of calcite spar and glass beads used in each of the

experiments are given in Table 4.

   The inlet fluid used in the experiment was a 50-50 % mixture of CaCl2 and NaHCO3 stock solutions

prepared from reagent-grade salts dissolved in deionized water. The composition of the inlet solution for

each reactor is given in Table 5. They correspond to a calcite saturation index, log Ω, of either 0.70 or

1.42. Each reactor was injected with the stock solutions pre-equilibrated with atmosphere using a multi-

channel syringe pump at a controlled flow rate of 0.25 cm3.h-1 for each channel (Q = 6.94 10-8 l∙s-1), and

mixed through a T-valve at approximately 6 cm from the reactor inlet, as shown schematically in Figure

2. Consequently, the flow rate within the plug-flow reactor was 0.5 cm3.h-1 (Q = 1.38 10-7 l∙s-1).

   The combined calcite spar and glass beads resulted in a porosity of approximately 37 % in the packed

columns based on microtomographic and gravimetric determinations. The residence time of fluid in the

plug-flow column was approximately 20 min, while the residence time in the pre-mixing chamber was

approximately 5.5 min. The experiments were conducted for 28 days at room temperature (22°C). Before

the experiments, the samples were saturated with water under vacuum and injected with an acidic solution

(deionised water + 0.001 M HCl, pH 4.01) at a flow rate of 20 ml.h-1 (Q = 5.56 10-9 m3∙s-1) for 5 h to

further clean the mineral surfaces and eliminate fine particles.

   The pH of both the inlet and outlet solutions was measured using an Orion pH electrode. In addition,

major and minor elements were measured in solution by inductively coupled plasma mass spectroscopy

(ICP-MS), after acidification with nitric acid (pH < 2). Aliquots of inlet and outlet solutions were also

sampled with a capped vial under an N2 atmosphere to analyze the total inorganic carbonate content using

a total inorganic carbon analyzer (TIC).
3.    Characterization and analytical procedure regarding plug-flow experiments


3.1. Analysis of 3D geometry of plug-flow columns with X-ray microtomography

     The geometries of the three packed columns REAC-0 to REAC-2 were characterized by X-ray

microtomography (XMT) at Beamline 8.3.2 at the Advanced Light Source of Lawrence Berkeley

National Laboratory. The XMT method is based on a 3D reconstruction from a thousand 2D radiographs

of the X-ray attenuation properties of the various materials forming the columns. As air, glass beads and

carbonate minerals in the column reactors have different chemical compositions and densities, their

attenuation properties are different. Therefore, they can be differentiated on the 3D images.

     The optical system used in the experiment provides a spatial resolution of 4.46 µm (pixel size). Two

data sets were collected, before (time t0) and after (t1) the experiment. As the camera field is shorter than

the height of the sample, several scans were set up vertically and data were stitched together after

reconstruction. Tomographic reconstruction was done with the software package Octopus (Dierick et al.

[2004]) through use of the filtered back-projection algorithm. The reconstruction provides 3D images of

the X-ray absorption by the different materials in the sample. Each data set is 1600 × 1600 × 3000 voxels.

A voxel is defined as a pixel cubed and is represented as a volume of 4.46 × 4.46 × 4.46 µm3.

     Image processing was carried out using the Avizo® software. By using an appropriate image

processing procedure, it is possible to distinguish the different materials (e.g air, glass beads, and calcite)

and accurately quantify parameters characterizing the sample geometry, i.e. porosity distribution, pore

connectivity as well as geometric surface-area of the fluid-rock interface (Noiriel et al. [2004], Noiriel et

al. [2005]). Each of these parameters is based on averaging of a single 4.46 micron slice through the

column. To do this, the images were segmented; that is, the voxels belonging to the pore space were

distinguished from those belonging to the solid matrix. As data are noisy and present phase contrast, a

segmentation technique based on threshold values coupled with erosion-dilatation procedure was chosen

to separate the different materials (Gonzales and Woods [1992]). Before the segmentation procedure, the
data sets were normalized through a linear interpolation procedure to achieve consistency within a

dynamic range of intensity values on the different images. The images were registered and the noise was

reduced by running a 3D median filter. Then, the different parameters for segmentation were chosen by

visual inspection of the grey-level histogram and of the segmented volumes by comparison with the grey-

scale ones. At the end of the procedure, the pore space was separated from calcite and glass beads (Figure

3).


3.2. Quantitative determination of the extent of the reaction

      The mass of calcite precipitated in the columns was determined by two different but complementary

methods, i) chemical analysis of the effluent, and ii) XMT. The methods give complementary information

at two different scales, the first recording the spatially integrated rate over the 12 mm length of the

column, the second recording the time integrated rate within a single 4.46 µm slice through the column.

      The volume of precipitated calcite as the porosity changes were estimated from the difference in Ca

concentration between the sample inlet and outlet. Because only calcite has precipitated during the

experiments (see discussion below), the volume of precipitated calcite at time ti is given by:

                                         t =ti
                             Q ×υcal ∫
                  Vcal (ti ) =                    ∆Ca dt                                   (4)
                                         t = to



with Vcal the volume of calcite precipitated , Q the volumetric flow rate (m3∙s-1), υcal the molar volume of

calcite (m3∙mol-1), and ∆Ca the change in calcium concentration between the inlet and the outlet of the

sample (mol∙m-3). The spatially integrated porosity over the length of the columns at time ti is given by:

                                                           t =ti
                  φCa (ti ) = φ0 + ( Q ×υcal / VT ) ∫               ∆Ca dt                 (5)
                                                           t = to




where φCa is the porosity calculated from the change in Ca concentration across the column, and φ0 is the

initial sample porosity (at t0). This calculation is essentially the same as the one used to determine the net
reaction in the stirred reactor experiments described above, but with conversion from moles to volume

using the molar volume value for calcite.

   In samples REAC-0 and REAC-2, the volume of calcite precipitated was not sufficient to characterize

with XMT. In contrast to these columns, the amount of calcite precipitated in column REAC-1 was

significant enough to be followed and characterized using XMT. After segmentation of the XMT images,

the total porosity of the sample φ is simply the ratio of the pore space to the total volume of the sample

VT. The local porosity φ (z ) can also be calculated for each slice along the flow axis. It is also possible to

calculate the volume of precipitated calcite by calculating the difference in the number of calcite voxels

(or solid pixels) observed at the end (t1) and the beginning (t0) of the experiment:


        Vcal' =   ∑ ( N (t ) − N (t ) ) ×V
                  VT
                       cal    1          cal   0      pix                          (6)



with Ncal the number of calcite voxels in the image, the total volume of the sample, and Vpix the volume of

a voxel (Vpix = 4.46×4.46×4.46 µm3). The surface-area (m2) of the calcite crystals is defined as the number

of fluid-calcite edge voxels Ncal-fluid multiplied by the voxel surface-area (Spix = 4.46×4.46 µm2). The

                                                            '
geometric surface-area normalized to the mass of calcite, S geo (m2∙g-1), is defined by:


           '
         S geo=   ∑N
                  VT
                       cal − fluid   × S pix / ρcal × Vcal
                                                        '
                                                                                            (7)



with ρ cal the density of calcite.


3.3. Reactive transport modeling

   Reactive transport modeling using the code CrunchFlow was used to interpret both the voxel-scale

microtomography results and the effluent chemistry from the plug-flow column. The code CrunchFlow,

or its predecessors, has been used for over 20 years to simulate mineral precipitation (and dissolution) in

porous media (Steefel and Van Cappellen [1990], Steefel and Lasaga [1990], Steefel and Lasaga [1994],

Steefel and Lichtner [1994], Maher et al. [2009]). The software solves a set of partial differential
equations for the conservation of aqueous and solid mass, with treatment of fluid flow, molecular

diffusion, and multicomponent reaction at the continuum scale:

         ∂
            (φ C ) + ∇ • ( −D∇(C ) + qC ) = −∑ν im Rm                                    (8)
         ∂t                                     m



where D is the dispersion tensor, including both kinematic dispersion and molecular diffusion, C is the

concentration, q is the Darcy flux, Rm is the rate of reaction (precipitation or dissolution) of the mineral m,

and νim is the stoichiometric coefficient that gives the number of moles of component i in mineral m. For a

given mineral, multiple kinetic pathways can be considered that operate simultaneously:


        Rm =   ∑R
               p
                    p                                                                               (9)



where Rp is a parallel kinetic pathway. An example is the simultaneous inclusion of a 2D heterogeneous

nucleation pathway operating at the same time as a spiral growth precipitation mechanism, as considered

in this work. The principle application of the code CrunchFlow is to the upscaled continuum problem,

which uses volume averaged values of the porosity and reactive surface area. While the porosity change

associated with mineral precipitation is expected to modify the permeability as well, methods to measure

the pressure gradient over the length of the short column were not available at the time of the experiment.

Therefore, it is assumed that permeability remains constant over the time scale of the experiment in the

modeling. Measurements of effluent fluid mass verify that the overall flow rate remained relatively

constant using the syringe pumps.

   For initial conditions, the mass of calcite added to the columns was assumed to be spread evenly over

the length of the column, resulting in an average volume fraction of calcite spar of 20 %. To estimate the

initial reactive surface area, we used the value of 0.012 m2∙g-1 determined by BET method. However, any

new calcium carbonate formed was assumed to have a specific surface area of 0.21 m2∙g-1 based on the

discussion below. The effect of using various rate laws and specific surface areas to match the observed
distribution of reaction products in the columns can then be evaluated with the reactive transport

modeling.

   An advection-dominated flux based on the measured flow rate was used as an upstream Neumann

boundary condition for the plug-flow column experiments. The chemistry of the injection solution is

described in Table 5.

   The 12 mm length of the column is discretized using a constant grid spacing of 0.1 mm, with the

exception of a single grid cell of 3.645 mm corresponding to the mixing manifold at the inlet of the

column. The grid cell corresponding to the mixing manifold is intended to match the approximately 5.5

minute residence time of solution in this chamber just upstream from the packed column itself.

   A detailed pore scale simulation of the plug-flow column is currently beyond the capabilities of

CrunchFlow, although we do present the results of calculations that resolve 10-30 µm diffusion boundary

layers next to reacting calcite grains so as to evaluate the potential for a diffusion control (partial or

complete) on precipitation rates. For these calculations, a Dirichlet (fixed concentration) boundary

condition is used at either 10 or 30 µm from the calcite surface. The 10 and 30 µm boundary layers were

considered based on the discussions presented in Hintz and Johnson [1989] and Sugano [2008] working

in the field of pharmaceutics. Hintz and Johnson [1989] presented a model for the width of the diffusion

boundary layer in the case of a dispersion of grains within a stirred fluid medium. Their analysis, which

was based on calibration to measured dissolution rates, determined an empirical maximum width of 30

µm for the boundary layer as grain size increased. Sugano [2008] arrived at similar conclusions, but made

use of a Fluid Dynamic (FD) model to incorporate more rigorously the effects of both stirring rate and

grain size. Sugano [2008] showed that the width of the diffusion boundary layer, heff, affects the diffusion-

controlled flux to the mineral surface according to:

        ∂C           1
           =
           A ⋅ Deff      ( Cs − C B )                                             (10)
        ∂t          heff
where A is the mineral surface area, Deff is the effective diffusion coefficient, Cs is the concentration in the

aqueous phase immediately adjacent to the mineral surface, and CB is the concentration of the reacting

species in the bulk solution. In a strictly diffusion controlled regime, Cs would be the solubility, but a

more general treatment is considered here in which Cs is computed based on dynamics of the boundary

layer given appropriate boundary conditions for the bulk solution, reaction rate at the mineral surface, and

diffusion rates for all of the reacting species. In other words, the full reactive transport equation (Eq. 8),

with coupling of diffusion through the boundary layer and reaction at the mineral surface, is solved in the

case presented here. This allows for a partial rather than complete control by diffusion, since the actual

behavior depends on the ratio of the rate constant and diffusion coefficient for a given length scale. For a

spherical particle, the width of the hydrodynamic diffusion layer, heff, is given by:

          1    Sh
             =                                                                      (11)
         heff 2rp

where Sh is the Sherwood number and rp is the particle radius (Sugano [2008]). The Sherwood number

can be related to the Reynolds number:

                 2r p v rel ,tot
        Re p =                                                                      (12)
                          v

where vrel,tot is the total relative velocity of the particle against the fluid flow and ν is the kinematic

viscosity, and the Schmidt number:

                 ν
        Sc =          .                                                             (13)
               Deff

   The Sherwood number can be estimated from the semi-empirical Ranz-Marshall correlation often used

for a spherical particle (Ranz and Marshall [1952]):


        Sh= 2 + 0.6 Re1/2
                      p Sc
                          1/3
                              .                                                     (14)
Based on this FD model, Sugano [2008] was able to estimate a hydrodynamic diffusion layer of about 30

µm for large grains (250 µm radius) under largely stagnant conditions, in agreement with Hintz and

Johnson [1989]. For a stirred solution, Sugano [2008] estimated a hydrodynamic diffusion layer thickness

of approximately 10 µm. These values then were used to bracket the diffusion boundary layer calculations

carried out with CrunchFlow.

   The diffusion boundary layer calculations are carried out with a constant grid spacing of 100

nanometers (0.1 µm), resulting in a total of either 100 or 300 grid cells depending on whether the 10 or 30

µm boundary layer was considered. For surface area in Eq. 10, we used the geometric surface area for a

420 µm diameter calcite grain (in the middle of the range of the sieved grain size), with an additional

surface roughness factor of 2.303 based on BET measurements of the initial calcite spar crystals. In the

CrunchFlow calculations, all of the reacting surface area is considered to be present within a single

spherical geometry grid cell of 0.1 µm thickness, as in the calculations presented in Li et al. [2008]. The

rest of the domain is solution only and mineral precipitation is not allowed. In practice, the calculation

using CrunchFlow requires that a geometric surface area (with the addition of a surface roughness factor,

where appropriate) relative to the grid spacing is provided. For the 0.1 µm grid cell with a volume of

4.02×10-5 cm3, the geometric surface area of a 210 µm radius perfectly spherical grain is given by 107

m2∙m-3. Adding the surface roughness factor indicated by the difference between the BET-determined

value for the specific surface area and the ideal geometric estimate (see above), we arrive at a numerical

grid-size dependent (0.1 µm spacing) value for the surface area immediately adjacent to the calcite grain

of 2.304×107 m2∙m-3. Diffusion coefficients used in the calculation are given in Table 6. The

multicomponent diffusion equation based on the Nernst-Planck equation is solved, which preserves

electroneutrality while allowing for the different diffusion rates of the ions (Giambalvo et al. [2002],

Steefel and Maher [2009]).
4.    Results


4.1. Rates of calcite precipitation in CSTR experiments

     Rates of calcium carbonate precipitation determined from the Continuously Stirred Reactor (CSTR)

experiments, and normalized to the physical surface area of calcite measured by BET measurement at the

end of the experiment, are summarized in Table 2. The rates are plotted as a function of the saturation

index (log Ω) in the reactor in Figure 4 and can be described by the expression:


                                        [ (           ) ]
                 R = 1.79 ± 0.28 × 10 −9 exp ∆G R *T − 1 1.12± 0.1       (15)


     As discussed previously, the BET measurements of calcite physical surface area in the CSTR

experiments were used to estimate an average specific surface area based on the mass weighted average

of the BET surface area before and after the experiment. Final BET surface areas for experiments CS-1,

CS-2, CS-3, and CS-4 were 0.013, 0.015, 0.013, and 0.016 m2∙g-1, respectively (each with a 10 %

uncertainty in their value). These determinations lead to an estimate of the specific surface area of 0.21

m2∙g-1 for calcium carbonate precipitated during the experiment, a value that is compatible with that

determined by Tang et al. [2008a] of 0.26 m2∙g-1 at the end of their experiments.


4.2. Solution chemistry from plug-flow column reactors

     The chemical compositions of the inlet and outlet solutions show a decrease of calcium concentration

over the length of the column (∆Ca>0) as a result of calcite precipitation (Figure 5). Decrease is on

average higher for REAC-1 (∆Ca = 4.0 10-4 M) compared to REAC-2 (∆Ca= 4.0 10-5 M). The temporal

evolution of the concentrations in the solutions during the precipitation experiments is presented in Figure

5. Calcium concentration is almost constant with time, even if the outlet solution concentrations present a

slight decrease with time for REAC-2. For REAC-1, fluctuations are attributed to slight changes of the

flow rate of the pumps as Ca concentration is anti-correlated with Na concentration, which is used as a

monitor of the mixing efficiency since it is conservative. The pH also slightly decreases during
experiments. The outlet solutions remain highly oversaturated with respect to calcite; the saturation index

of the outlet solution log Ω drops to 1.17 for REAC-1, and remains close to 0.70 for REAC-2.


4.3. Determination of mineralogy of reaction products

   Raman spectroscopy was used to determine the identity of the calcium carbonate precipitates from the

plug-flow column.      Raman      spectra were     recorded    with a     LabRam HR800 Jobin-Yvon™

microspectrometer using 532 nm (green) laser excitation. The data indicated a good match with calcite (as

identified by its four absorption bands at 1088 (ν1-symmetric CO3 stretching), 714 (ν4-symmetric CO3

deformation), 284 and 157 (Ca and CO3 bond vibration) cm-1), although purely based on this data, the

initial formation of vaterite, which has a solubility about 0.58 log Ω units above that of calcite (De

Visscher and Vanderdeelen [2003]), cannot be ruled out, since vaterite typically transforms to calcite over

relatively short time scales. It should be pointed out, however, that that the precipitation rates determined

in the well-stirred reactors (Figure 4) appear to be completely continuous across what would be the

solubility limit of vaterite. It is highly unlikely that the curve for the rate would be continuous if two

distinct reactive phases were involved.


4.4. Calcite nucleation and growth

   The volume of precipitated calcite Vcal over the length of the plug-flow columns calculated from the

effluent chemistry is 4.94 and 0.57 mm3 for REAC-1 and REAC-2, respectively. The value for REAC-1 is

very close to the volume obtained by XMT ( V ' cal = 5.03 mm3 for an initial amount of calcite in the

sample equal to 63.86 mm3), which demonstrates the ability of XMT to accurately measure changes in

calcite content given enough accumulation of precipitate.

   Observations of the samples from REAC-1 and REAC-2 after the conclusion of the experiments

indicate differences both in the crystal growth rate, amount and morphology that appear to depend on two

main factors: the initial surface for calcite growth (i.e. glass bead or calcite spar) and the saturation index
log Ω. The growth rates were highest close to the column inlets where the supersaturation was highest, as

evidenced by the volume % of calcite precipitated (Figure 6). In particular, the first mm of column

REAC-1 shows porosity decrease of up to 6.8 %. As the saturation index decreases, either between

samples REAC-1 or REAC-2, or between inlet and outlet of sample REAC-1, the number of calcite

crystals formed on glass bead surfaces decreases. This is also an expected outcome to the extent that the

solution supersaturation falls below the 2D nucleation threshold (Teng et al. [2000]) within the column

due to consumption of calcium and carbonate. In general, new calcite crystals grew preferentially on the

calcite spar surfaces compared to the glass beads in the column (Figure 7a and 7b). Additional

observations with SEM (Figure 8) show that the shape of new calcite crystals differs greatly according to

the initial nucleation surface. The glass beads’ surface displays small, individual rhombohedral crystals

(i.e. without any link to the spar surface). Conversely, the growth of calcium carbonate on spar is

epitaxial, i.e. oriented on the single spar surfaces. Some 2D heterogeneous nuclei are visible as well.

   By subtracting registered 3D volumes (Figure 7c), it is possible to follow the shift of the fluid-rock

interface during the experiment. Figure 7c shows that the size of the crystals on glass beads or the

thickness of the new precipitated calcite layer on spar are variable, indicating a spatial variability of the

growth rates within the pores and/or different stages of calcite nucleation and growth. It is worth noting

that precipitation of calcite was detected across the length of the plug-flow column on spar surfaces,

whereas there is little evidence of precipitation on glass beads at distances greater than about 1-2 mm

from the sample inlet.


4.5. Surface area changes

   Calcite growth resulted in an increase of the surface roughness of both the glass beads and original

spar crystals (Figure 9). As a consequence, measurement of the geometric surface area and specific

surface with XMT reveals an increase of the fluid-calcite interface area with time for REAC-1 over

approximately the first 0.75 mm of the column length (Figure 10). Over this interval, the specific surface

area increases from a value of about 0.0075 ± 0.0002 m2∙g-1 to an average value of approximately 0.024
m2∙g-1, but locally with values as high as 0.058 m2∙g-1. The measurement of the specific surface area using

this approach is limited by the resolution of the XMT technique, which cannot measure sub-micron

features given the voxel size of 4.46 µm, but the observations are compatible with others based on the

SEM images and the BET determinations. The background value of 0.0075 m2∙g-1 agrees fairly well with

the estimate of 0.005 m2∙g-1 based on average grain size (425 µm) and an ideal spherical geometry. The

values for specific surface area over the first 0.75 mm of the column are actually higher than those

determined in the stirred cell experiments, suggesting a more prominent role for 2D heterogeneous

nucleation in the higher supersaturation columns. The value for the specific surface area of 0.21 m2∙g-1 for

the neo-formed calcium carbonate estimated from the BET analysis is higher, but this represents only the

calcium carbonate precipitates, not the combination of precipitates and original calcite spar. Nonetheless,

the XMT mapping of specific surface area makes it clear that a distinct surface roughening event that

coincides with the greatest addition of calcium carbonate mass occurs over the first part of the column

where the supersaturation is highest.



5.    Discussion


5.1. Interpretation of rates from stirred reactors

     The primary objective of the stirred reactor experiments was to provide a baseline rate of calcium

carbonate precipitation as a function of saturation state (log Ω) on the calcite spar seeds in the absence of

“porous medium” effects. As Teng et al. [2000] made clear in their analysis of how the velocity of

individual steps on the calcite surface relate to the overall supersaturation (and thus, to the applicability of

overall “affinity-based” rate laws), the bulk rate depends on the range of mechanisms that are operative,

as well as the density of individual reactive sites. This implies that not all materials may show the same

bulk rates of precipitation given the potentially very different reactive site distributions per unit surface

area of calcite. In addition, there may be issues even in the case of well-mixed stirred reactors to the

extent that a diffusion boundary layer develops, since Pokrovsky et al. [2005] have shown that a diffusion
control (or partial control) is possible for dissolution of calcite even at circumneutral pH. A partial

diffusion control is also possible in a more nearly stagnant column experiment (no stirring), or in the case

where the grains are large, as suggested by the analysis of Sugano [1998].

   Figure 11 compares the rates of precipitation determined in this study with those determined by Tang

et al. [2008a,b] at 25°C at similar supersaturation. Rates determined by Tang et al. [2008a] are close to an

order of magnitude more rapid those measured in this study. Some of this may be related to the

experimental approach outlined in Tang et al. [2008b] and used in Tang et al. [2008a], which made use of

pH-stat batch reactors without seeds to determine the rate. In their study, one can observe significant

changes in precipitation rate by as much as a factor of 7 over time, as for example with their samples 20,

12, and 13, all measured at a saturation index of 1.11-1.12, but at times ranging from 9 to 14 to 59 min,

respectively (Tang et al. [2008a]).

   Tang et al [2008a,b] are not the only ones that report rates of precipitation higher than those observed

in this study. The Shiraki and Brantley [1995] data, if extrapolated to 25°C using an activation energy of

48 kJ∙mol-1 (Pokrovsky et al. [2005]), would yield a rate constant of about 10-6.33 mol∙m-2∙s-1, while the

direct measurements of precipitation at 25°C by Nancollas and Reddy [1971] and Inskeep and Bloom

[1985] yield rate constants of 10-6.86 and 10-6.41 mol∙m-2∙s-1, respectively. Some of these experiments were

seeded, so the difference cannot be attributed completely to the presence or absence of a discrete

nucleation event in the absence of seed material.

   Comparing the rates of precipitation with calcite dissolution rates is more difficult, since the same

mechanisms need not apply. Pokrovsky et al. [2005] determined a dissolution rate constant for calcite of

10-6.44 mol∙m-2∙s-1. In addition, Li et al. [2008] found a good match for dissolution of the same calcite spar

used in this study in a single pore using the rate law proposed by Chou et al. [1989], which contains a pH

independent term of 10-6.18 mol∙m-2∙s-1. More recently, Hassenkam et al. [2011] found a rate of dissolution

of Iceland spar calcite of 10-5.28 mol∙m-2∙s-1.
   Another potential clue for the difference in results is suggested by the higher order dependence of the

calcium carbonate precipitation rate on ΔG observed in the Tang et al [2008a,b] experiments. At higher

temperature and/or supersaturation, 2D heterogeneous nucleation may be the dominant growth

mechanism. Teng et al. [2000] reported that at log Ω of about 0.7, 2D heterogeneous nucleation

dominated, while at superaturation as low as log Ω = 0.34, spiral growth and 2D heterogeneous

nucleation may coexist. Without seeds in the Tang et al [2008a,b] experiments, nucleation was the only

means by which calcite could be precipitated initially and evidently their data record such discrete

nucleation events. This conclusion is further reinforced by the higher order dependence of the Tang data

on supersaturation, with a best fit given using an exponent n = 3.2 as fitted in this study using only 25°C

data from Tang et al. [2008a]. The data in this study, in contrast, show a best fit over the range of

saturation states considered with n = 1.12 (Eq. 15). These compare with an exponent of 1.16 determined

by Nancollas and Reddy [1971] at 25 °C and 1.09 by Shiraki and Brantley [1995] for some of their

vigorously stirred batch experiments carried out at intermediate supersaturation at 100°C. Shiraki and

Brantley [1995] attributed their linear data to a rate control by adsorption, but it seems more probable that

in the experiments described in this study, a multi-sourced multiple spiral growth mechanism is operative

(Teng et al. [2000]). Teng et al. [2000] show that the rate of a multi-sourced, multiple spiral growth

mechanism is given by:


        Rm =
                               (   ) [exp(∆G R T ) − 1]
               a e ω β m' k B T ∆G R *T )           *

               8ωα + 2Λk T (∆G R T )  *
                                                                                            (16)
                           B



where ae is is the equilibrium activity of the solute, β is the rate constant (in units of length over time), ω

is the molar volume of the mineral, kB is the Boltzmann constant, T the absolute temperature, α is the step

edge free energy (per unit length per unit height), m’ is the number of screw locations and Λ is the length

of the line over which these m’ screw locations occur. In cases where the second term in the denominator

of Eq. 16 dominates over the first, as in the case of surface imperfections, the ΔG terms in the numerator

and denominator may cancel, resulting in a linear or nearly linear dependence on ΔG (Teng et al. [2000]).
   Another possible source of the discrepancy between the experiments reported here and those in other

studies may relate to a partial or complete control of the rate by molecular diffusion. The observation by

Pokrovsky et al. [2005] that a partial diffusion control occurred even at circumneutral pH was based on

the observed stirring rate dependence of the dissolution rate. Whether a partial or complete control by

diffusion occurs depends on the relative rates of surface reaction versus diffusion. This effect can be

investigated using numerical modeling if the size of the diffusion boundary layer, designated as heff above,

can be estimated. Under stagnant conditions and a grain size averaging about 420 µm, the analysis of

Hintz and Johnson [1989] and Sugano [2008] suggest a diffusion boundary layer of about 30 µm. If we

assume that the rates determined by Tang et al. [2008a] are surface reaction-controlled rates, which seems

reasonable given the stirring of their solutions and the small grain size (the width of the hydrodynamic

boundary layer scales with the grain size and approaches the asymptotic molecular diffusion limit for

crystals less than about 10 µm), we can calculate the rates for the large crystals used in this study

assuming some potential mixture of surface reaction and diffusion control. This is done by solving for the

surface reaction rate at the mineral surface using the Tang et al. [2008a] rates simultaneously with

multicomponent diffusion across the width of the hydrodynamic diffusion layer, heff. The 30 µm boundary

layer calculations can also be compared with the 10 µm boundary layer case, which is more likely for the

well-stirred reactors. Figure 12 shows the saturation state (log Ω) in the boundary layer calculated as a

function of distance from the crystal surface for these two cases. In each case, the surface reaction rate in

the single grid cell containing the reactive calcite is taken from the study of Tang using a rate law of the

form:


                       [ (            ) ]
        R = 1.40 × 10 −9 exp ∆G R *T − 1
                                            3.2
                                                                 (17)


which is based on the fit of the Tang et al. [2008a] data shown in Figure 11. The high rate of precipitation

at 25°C predicted by the Tang data, and as captured by Eq. 17, results in a flux at the mineral surface that

exceeds what molecular diffusion can transport to and from the surface, so a gradient develops. The result

is that the saturation state at the mineral surface, which is what actually determines the surface reaction
rate, is less than it is in the bulk solution. If a complete diffusion control applied, the solution immediately

adjacent to the crystal would be at equilibrium with calcite. The coupled diffusion-reaction calculations

indicate, however, that the saturation state should be lower next to the crystal than it is in the bulk

solution, but not at equilibrium for the 10 µm boundary layer, log Ω = 0.78, while for the 30 µm case, the

saturation index decreases to approximately 0.73. These are compared to a log Ω value of just under 0.82

for the bulk solution.

   At steady state, the diffusive flux of reactants to and from the mineral surface must balance the rate of

reaction at the mineral surface itself. Therefore, the lower rate of reaction associated with a partial

diffusion control is captured by the surface reaction-controlled rate immediately adjacent to the mineral,

which “sees” the lower saturation state of that microenvironment. Using the calculated lower saturation

index from the diffusion boundary layer rather than the values of the saturation index from the bulk

solution results in lower precipitation rates than would be predicted by a surface reaction rate control

only. For example, in the case of the 30 µm hydrodynamic boundary layer, the calculated value of the

saturation index immediately adjacent to the crystal surface of about 0.735 results in a prediction of the

rate using Eq. 17 of 1.68×10-8 mol∙m-2∙s-1 as compared to a rate of 1.73×10-7 mol∙m-2∙s-1 if the bulk

solution saturation index of 0.82 for experiment CS-4 from this study applied (i.e., as if no hydrodynamic

boundary layer developed). In this way, assuming the Tang et al. [2008a] data describe the surface-

reaction controlled rate accurately, one can systematically compute the lower rates that would occur with

a 30 µm hydrodynamic boundary layer were present (Table 7 and Figure 13), a situation that likely

applies in the case of the largely stagnant flow in the plug-flow column.

   Despite the potentially important role of a partial rate control by molecular diffusion in controlling the

rate of reactions where large crystals are present, from Figure 11 it is clear that this cannot explain all of

the discrepancy between the rates determined in this study and those measured in other studies. The

likeliest explanation for most of the discrepancy is that the surface of the calcite spar used in this study

has a much lower reactive site density than the calcite seed used in the other studies. A study of calcite
precipitation on Iceland spar conducted by Nehrke et al. [2007] made use of calcite that was essentially

identical to that used in the experiments in this study. Nehrke et al. [2007] reported rates ranging from

about 10-6 to 10-7 mol∙m-2∙s-1, or still 1-2 orders of magnitude faster than those reported here. However,

their surface area normalization was based on grain geometry rather than a BET measurement, with the

result that their reported specific surface area was about 1-2 orders of magnitude lower than that

determined here. Since the Iceland spar used in their experiments is visually almost identical to that used

in this study, it seems reasonable to recalculate their rates using the specific surface area determined here

to see if this reconciles the apparent discrepancies. Their experiments are complicated by the fact that

they considered a range of calcium to carbonate ion activities and their effect on the rate of calcite

precipitation (Nehrke et al. [2007], Stack and Grantham [2010], Gebrehiwet et al. [2012]). In this study

only a relatively narrow range of calcium to carbonate ion activities from 70-115 was considered [Table

2]. Despite this additional effect, it is clear from Figure 14 that the Nehrke et al. [2007] rates are broadly

compatible with those reported here. The reactive site density associated with the Iceland spar used in

this and the Nehrke et al. [2007] study is evidently quite different from that of newly nucleated calcite,

such as in the Tang et al. [2008a] study.


5.2. Numerical modeling of calcite precipitation in the plug-flow reactor

   Reactive transport modeling can be used to test the various rate expressions considered here for calcite

precipitation. The objective is to match both the effluent chemistry, which gives the rate of precipitation

integrated over the length of the column, and the X-ray microtomography data from column REAC-1.

This is done in the simplest case by using the known injection (boundary) and initial conditions from the

plug-flow column experiment and incorporating these into a reactive transport simulation that runs for 28

days, the length of the experiment. As a base case, we use an average of 20 %vol calcite that is distributed

evenly over the length of the column and we use the rate expression determined in the stirred reactor

experiments (CS-1 to CS-4) and given in Eq. 15. In addition, we assume that the initial and final specific

surface area is that of the calcite spar determined by BET method as 0.012 m2∙g-1.
   The simulations demonstrate that the nearly linear rate law (n = 1.12) represented by Eq. 15 cannot

match the observed distribution of calcium carbonate precipitate when the specific surface area of calcite

is held constant at the initial value of 0.012 m2∙g-1 (Figure 15). Specifically, the modeling fails to capture

the nonlinear increase in calcium carbonate mass within 1-2 mm of the column inlet.

   Several possibilities to improve the match of the reactive transport simulations and the X-ray

microtomography data present themselves. One possibility is that the higher specific surface area for

newly precipitated calcium carbonate determined in the stirred cell experiments, 0.21 m2∙g-1, should be

used. If the higher value is used, then the precipitation of new calcium carbonate in the zone within 1-2

mm of the column inlet is magnified over time. The calcite precipitation profile effectively self-sharpens

due to the positive feedback of the high specific surface area generation on the rate of precipitation.

Alternatively, the nonlinear profile close to the column inlet might be attributed to the nonlinearity of the

rate expressions themselves. In what follows, we first test the various rate expressions by carrying out

simulations in which it is assumed that all of the new calcium carbonate has a specific surface area of 0.21

m2∙g-1. In addition to being measured directly in the stirred cell experiments in this study, the higher

specific surface value seems reasonable if the newly precipitated calcite consists in part of smaller

crystals formed via heterogeneous nucleation.

   The data of Tang et al. [2008a] provide a surface reaction controlled rate that can be extended to

higher supersaturation than was considered in the stirred cell experiments in this study. If we want to

apply this surface reaction controlled rate expression to the coarse crystals present in the plug-flow

column experiments in this study, however, it is necessary to factor in the partial diffusion control that

reduces those rates in the case of the large seed crystals of calcite and glass beads used in this study. To

do this, we fit an effective rate expression to the partial diffusion controlled rates given in Table 7 - here

the rate is parameterized in terms of the bulk saturation state (which is the only quantity calculated in this

single continuum version of CrunchFlow), but reflects the lower supersaturation expected immediately

adjacent to the crystal when a 30 µm hydrodynamic boundary layer is present.
   This mixed rate control results in a lower order dependence on the saturation state of the solution,

which can be described with the following expression:


                        [ (           ) ]
        R = 6.31 × 10 −9 exp ∆G R *T − 1 2.00                              (18)


This effective rate expression can be used to calculate calcium carbonate precipitation rates in a plug-flow

column assuming that a 30 µm hydrodynamic boundary layer is present every case surrounding the

reacting calcite spar crystals. As discussed in the next section, this reduces the high rates of precipitation

one would expect if only a surface reaction rate control were operative.

   In Figure 16, a comparison of the reactive transport simulation fit with the X-ray microtomography

results after 28 days is shown for three cases, all assuming a value for the specific surface area of newly

precipitated calcium carbonate of 0.21 m2∙g-1: i) a profile based on Eq. 15, the best fit to the stirred cell

data from this study, with n = 1.12, ii) a profile based on the Tang et al. [2008a] data as represented by

Eq. 17, with n = 3.20, and iii) a profile based on a partial diffusion control in which a 30 µm

hydrodynamic boundary layer (HBL) is assumed, thus lowering both the rate and the reaction order (n =

2.00, Eq. 18). Neither of the Tang et al. [2008a] based simulations (Figure 16b and c) match the XMT

data, as they predict too high a nonlinearity in the profile close to the column inlet. The best match is

actually provided by the nearly linear rate expression (Eq. 15) determined from the stirred cell

experiments in this study.

   Alternatively, it is possible to match the XMT profiles by assuming a constant initial specific surface

area of 0.012 m2∙g-1, or if there is a specific surface area increase, it is much closer to the value suggested

by the XMT characterization (e.g., 0.025 m2∙g-1). Neither of these scenarios seems reasonable, however,

since a higher specific surface area was measured even in the stirred cell experiments (CS-1 to CS-4) that

were carried out at lower supersaturation than was achieved near the plug-flow column inlet. The higher

value of 0.21 m2∙g-1 seems reasonable given the other measurements of newly precipitated calcite specific

surface area in the literature, which range from about 0.19 m2∙g-1 determined by Shiraki and Brantley
[1995] to 0.26 m2∙g-1 determined by Tang et al. [2008a]. Moreover, the higher order dependence on ΔG in

the Tang et al. [2008a] study suggests a nucleation mechanism, which implies the rapid generation of new

surface area (Steefel and Van Cappellen [1990]), an event that is incompatible with the assumption of a

constant and low specific surface area of 0.012 m2∙g-1.

   Another possibility that can be tested is whether two calcite precipitation mechanisms operating in

parallel can provide a better description of the XMT data. The stirred cell reactor experiments document a

linear or nearly linear dependence on Ω that cannot be attributed to even a partial diffusion control, since

the surface reaction controlled rates are too slow according to the calculations. A spiral growth

mechanism involving multi-source multiple spirals seems most likely, with the overall rate remaining low

due to the relative paucity of reactive sites on the spar surface. However, these experiments did not test

the entire range of Ω encountered in the REAC-1 experiment that has been the focus of the X-ray

microtomography in this study, so it seems reasonable to postulate that more than a single precipitation

mechanism was involved in the case of the REAC-1 column, in contrast to the stirred reactor experiments

carried out at lower supersaturation. It is postulated that, while a linear or nearly spiral growth mechanism

may operate at lower supersaturations, a 2D heterogeneous nucleation mechanism is more important at

higher supersaturation. The suggestion of a 2D heterogeneous nucleation mechanism, presumably with a

higher order dependence on supersaturation, is reinforced by the observations in Figure 8e and 8f of small

2D nuclei formed on the calcite spar surface, as well as the local growth of calcite crystals directly on

glass beads. In addition, the XMT records an increase in specific surface area over the first 1 mm of the

column, suggesting that a nucleation event was operative at the higher supersaturations close to the

column inlet. To test this hypothesis, we consider a reactive transport simulation in which the higher order

nucleation mechanism suggested by the data of Tang et al. [2008a], but modified to include a partial

diffusion control according to Eq. 18, is combined with a parallel, nearly linear reaction based on a multi-

step spiral growth and described by Eq. 15. When both reaction pathways are included, however, a match

with the XMT data is only possible when the diffusion-modified Tang rate constant in Eq. 18 is reduced
to about 2.5×10-10 mol∙m-2∙s-1. Using this value, one obtains the spatial profile shown in Figure 17a, which

is in reasonable agreement with the data. The postulated field of dominance of the two mechanisms can

be represented by plotting the two parallel rates versus saturation index (log Ω) (Figure 17b).

     These simulations results suggest that 2D heterogeneous nucleation, while suggested by direct

observation of newly formed crystals and nuclei on both glass bead and calcite spar surfaces and the

determination of an increase in specific surface area by both BET and XMT methods, was suppressed in

the column relative to what was predicted from the seedless batch experiments of Tang et al. [2008a]. The

seedless batch experiments of Tang et al. [2008a] presumably involve a highly transient nucleation stage

followed by crystal growth, an interpretation further supported by the observation of a significant

decrease in calcite precipitation rates over time in their experiments (Steefel and Van Cappellen [1990]).

Both the well stirred and plug-flow reactor experiments in this study are carried out much closer to steady

state conditions. A possible conclusion is that while 2D heterogeneous nucleation occurs in the column

experiments in particular, it is not a large effect on a mass (or volume) basis.



6.    Conclusions

     This experimental study highlights the effects of calcite growth on a porous network representing a

very simple analogue of sandstone. Both crystal shape and growth rate are strongly dependent on the

saturation index and mineral surface nucleation process. Stirred reactor experiments used to provide

baseline rates for the coarsely crystalline calcite spar seed material show precipitation rates for calcite

with a nearly linear dependence on saturation state, Ω, and at significantly slower rates than measured

elsewhere using either no or different seed material. The nearly linear dependence on saturation

determined in this study over the range of saturation, log Ω, of 0.15 to 0.82, is likely due to a multiple,

multi-sourced spiral growth mechanism (Teng et al. [2000]). Some reconciliation of the Tang et al.

[2008a] data with the rates determined in this study is possible by taking into account the partial diffusion

control expected for the large seed crystals considered here, which has the effect of suppressing
nucleation to the extent that the supersaturation immediately adjacent to the crystal is lowered. The partial

diffusion control is expected to be more important in the case of the more nearly stagnant plug-flow

columns, but a discrepancy with the Tang et al. [2008a] batch data persists there as well. However, a good

match is obtained with the data in Nehrke et al. [2007], who used seed material essentially identical to

that used in this study, if the BET-determined specific surface area determined in this study is used in

place of the geometric estimate. The best match with the XMT data, which agrees remarkably well with

the spatially integrated rates determined from effluent chemistry in the case of column REAC-1, is

provided by either the nearly linear rate law determined in the stirred cell experiments (n = 1.12), or with

a combination of nearly linear (multi-sourced spiral growth) and 2D heterogeneous nucleation rate in

which the nucleation mechanism is minor on a mass (or volume) basis.

   The study indicates that upscaling of calcite precipitation rates to porous samples is possible using data

from well-stirred reactor experiments, although it is necessary to account for the evolution of reactivity.

The positive feedback between the reactive surface area evolution and the reaction rate results in

nonlinear, time-dependent mineral precipitation profile. We expect that upscaling is likely more difficult

for natural sub-surface sandstone with hierarchical physical and geochemical heterogeneity structures.



Acknowledgments

   This research was supported by the Center for Nanoscale Control of Geologic CO2, an Energy Frontier

Research Center funded by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy

Sciences under Award Number DE-AC02-05CH11231. Synchrotron XMT work was performed at the

Advanced Light Source, Beamline 8.3.2. Joern Larsen (ESD/LBNL), Alastair MacDowell (ALS/LBNL),

Philippe Recourt, Sandra Ventalon and Sylvie Regnier (Université de Lille 1) are thanked for their

assistance with ICP-MS, XMT acquisition, SEM, Raman, and preparation of thin sections, respectively.
   References




   Aagaard, P. and Helgeson, H.C., 1982. Thermodynamic and kinetic constrains on reaction-rates

among minerals and aqueous solutions 1. Theoretical considerations. American Journal of Science,

282(3): 237-285.

   Blum, A.E. and Lasaga, A.C., 1987. Monte Carlo simulations of surface reaction rate laws. In: W.

Stumm (Editor), Aquatic Surface Chemistry: Chemical Processes at the Particle-Water Interface. John

Wiley & Sons, New York, pp. 255-292.

   Chou, L., Garrels, R.M. and Wollast, R., 1989. Comparative study of the kinetics and mechanisms of

dissolution of carbonate minerals. Chemical Geology, 78: 269-282.

   Dagan G., 1988. Time-dependent macrodispersion for solute transport in anisotropic heterogeneous

aquifers. Water Resources Research, 24: 1491-1500

   De Visscher, A. and Vanderdeelen, J., 2003. Estimation of the solubility constant of calcite, aragonite,

vaterite, at 25°C based on primary data using the Pitzer ion interaction approach. Chemical Monthly, 134:

769-775.

   Dierick, M., Masschaele, B. and Van Hoorebeke, L., 2004. Octopus, a fast and user-friendly

tomographic reconstruction package developed in LabView (R). Measurement Science & Technology,

15(7): 1366-1370.

   Giambalvo, E.R., Steefel, C.I., Fisher, A.T., Rosenberg, N.D. and Wheat, C.G., 2002. Effect of fluid-

sediment reaction on hydrothermal fluxes of major elements, eastern flank of the Juan de Fuca Ridge.

Geochimica Et Cosmochimica Acta, 66(10): 1739-1757.
      Gebrehiwet, T.A., Redden, G.D., Fujita, Y., Belg, M.S., Smith, R.W., 2012. The effects of the CO32- to

Ca2+ ion activity ratio on calcite precipitation kinetics and Sr2+ partitioning. Geochemical Transactions,

13: 1, doi:10.1186/1467-4866-13-1.

      Gelhar, L.W., 1986. Stochastic subsurface hydrology from theory to applications. Water Resources

Research, 22: 135S-145S

      Gonzales, R.C. and Woods, R.E., 1992. Digital image processing. Addison-Wesley Publishing

Compagny, Reading, Massachusetts, 716 pp.

      Hassenkam, T., Johnsson, A., Bechgaard, K. and Stipp, S.L.S., 2011. Tracking single coccolith

dissolution with picogram resolution and implications for CO(2) sequestration and ocean acidification.

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 108(21): 8571-8576.

      Hintz, R.J. and Johnson, K.C., 1989. The effect of particle size distribution on dissolution rate and oral

absorption. International Journal of Pharmaceutics, 51(1): 9-17.

      Inskeep, W.P. and Bloom, P.R., 1985. An evaluation of rate-equations for calcite precipitation kinetics

at PCO2 less than 0.01atm and pH greater than 8. Geochimica Et Cosmochimica Acta, 49(10): 2165-

2180.

      Lasaga, A.C., 1998. Kinetic theory in the earth sciences. Princeton University Press, New Jersey, 811

pp.

      Lasaga, A.C., 1981. Rate laws in chemical reactions. In Kinetics of Geochemical Processes. Vol 8,

A.C. Lasaga and R.J. Kirkpatrick (eds). Mineralogical Society of America, 135-169.

      Li, L., Peters, C.A. and Celia, M.A., 2006. Upscaling geochemical reaction rates using pore-scale

network modeling. Advances in Water Resources, 29(9): 1351-1370.

      Li, L., Steefel, C.I. and Yang, L., 2008. Scale dependence of mineral dissolution rates within single

pores and fractures. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 72(2): 360-377.
   Maher, K., Steefel, C.I., White, A.F. and Stonestrom, D.A., 2009. The role of reaction affinity and

secondary minerals in regulating chemical weathering rates at the Santa Cruz Soil Chronosequence,

California. Geochimica Et Cosmochimica Acta, 73(10): 2804-2831.

   Nancollas, G. and Reddy, M.M., 1971. Crytallization of calcium carbonate 2. Calcite growth

mechanism. Journal of Colloid and Interface Science, 37(4): 824-830.

   Nehrke, G., Reichart, G.J., Van Cappellen, P., Meile, C., Bijma, J., 2007. Dependence of calcite

growth rate and Sr partitioning on solution stoichiometry: Non-Kossel crystal growth. Geochimica Et

Cosmochimica Acta, 71: 2240-2249.

   Nielsen, A.E., 1984. Electrolyte crystal-growth mechanisms. Journal of Crystal Growth, 67(2): 289-

310.

   Noiriel, C., Bernard, D., Gouze, P. and Thibaut, X., 2005. Hydraulic properties and microgeometry

evolution in the course of limestone dissolution by CO2-enriched water. Oil & Gas Science and

Technology, 60(1): 177-192.

   Noiriel, C., Gouze, P. and Bernard, D., 2004. Investigation of porosity and permeability effects from

microstructure changes during limestone dissolution. Geophysical Research Letters, 31(24): L24603,

doi:10.1029/2004GL021572.

   Oelkers, E.H., Schott, J. and Devidal, J.L., 1994. The effect of aluminium, pH, and chemical affinity

on the rates of aluminosilicate dissolution reactions. Geochimica Et Cosmochimica Acta, 58(9): 2011-

2024.

   Pokrovsky, O.S., Golubev, S.V. and Schott, J., 2005. Dissolution kinetics of calcite, dolomite and

magnesite at 25 degrees C and 0 to 50 atm pCO(2). Chemical Geology, 217(3-4): 239-255.

   Ranz, W.E. and Marshall, W.R., 1952. Evaporation from drops 1. Chemical Engineering Progress,

48(3): 141-146.
   Shiraki, R. and Brantley, S.L., 1995. Kinetics of near-equilibrium calcite precipitation at 100°C - An

evaluation of elementary reaction-based and affinity-based rate laws. Geochimica Et Cosmochimica Acta,

59(8): 1457-1471.

   Stack, A.G. and Grantham, M.C., 2010. Growth rate of calcite steps as a function of aqueous calcium-

to-carbonate ratio: Independent attachment and detachment of calcium and carbonate ions. Crystal

Growth and Design, 10: 1409-1413.

   Steefel, C.I., DePaolo, D.J. and Lichtner, P.C., 2005. Reactive transport modeling: An essential tool

and a new research approach for the Earth sciences. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 240(3-4): 539-

558.

   Steefel, C.I. and Lasaga, A.C., 1990. Evolution of dissolution patterns: Permeability change due to

coupled flow and reaction. In: D. Melchior and R.L. Bassett (Editors), Chemical Modeling of Aqueous

Systems II. American Chemical Society, Washington DC, pp. 212-225.

   Steefel, C.I. and Lasaga, A.C., 1994. A coupled model for transport of multiple chemical species and

kinetic precipitation/dissolution reactions with application to reactive flow in single phase hydrothermal

systems. . American Journal of Science 294: 529-592.

   Steefel, C.I. and Lichtner, P.C., 1994. Diffusion and reaction in rock matrix bordering a hyperalkaline

fluid-filled fracture. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 58(17): 3595-3612.

   Steefel, C.I. and Maher, K., 2009. Fluid-Rock Interaction: A Reactive Transport Approach. In: E.H.

Oelkers and J. Schott (Editors), Thermodynamics and Kinetics of Water-Rock Interaction. Reviews in

Mineralogy & Geochemistry. Mineralogical Soc Amer, Chantilly, pp. 485-532.

   Steefel, C.I. and Van Cappellen, P., 1990. A new kinetic approach to modeling water-rock interaction

- The role of nulceation, precursors, and Ostwald ripening. Geochimica Et Cosmochimica Acta, 54(10):

2657-2677.
   Sugano, K., 2008. Theoretical comparison of hydrodynamic diffusion layer models used for

dissolution simulation in drug discovery and development. International Journal of Pharmaceutics, 363(1-

2): 73-77.

   Tang, J.W., Dietzel, M., Bohm, F., Kohler, S.J. and Eisenhauer, A., 2008a. Sr(2+)/Ca(2+) and

(44)Ca/(40)Ca fractionation during inorganic calcite formation: II. Ca isotopes. Geochimica Et

Cosmochimica Acta, 72(15): 3733-3745.

   Tang, J.W., Kohler, S.J. and Dietzel, M., 2008b. Sr2+/Ca2+ and Ca-44/Ca-40 fractionation during

inorganic calcite formation: I. Sr incorporation. Geochimica Et Cosmochimica Acta, 72(15): 3718-3732.

   Teng, H.H., Dove, P.M. and De Yoreo, J.J., 2000. Kinetics of calcite growth: Surface processes and

relationships to macroscopic rate laws. Geochimica Et Cosmochimica Acta, 64(13): 2255-2266.

   White, A.F. and Brantley, S.L., 2003. The effect of time on the weathering of silicate minerals: why

do weathering rates differ in the laboratory and field? Chemical Geology, 202: 479-506.

   Wolery, T.J. et al., 1990. Current status of the EQ3/6 software package for geochemical modeling. Acs

Symposium Series, 416: 104-116.
Figure Captions




Figure 1. Scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of (a) glass beads and (b) and (c) calcite

crystal before experiments.




Figure 2. Schematic of the plug-flow column experimental setup.




Figure 3. XMT cross-section (256×256 pixels) of the sample REAC-1 (a) Initial 256-grey levels

image and (b) image after segmentation, identifying porosity (black), calcite (grey) and glass bead

(white).




Figure 4. Saturation index (log Ω) versus rate for the stirred cell experiments in this study.




Figure 5. Changes in effluent Ca (a) and pH (b) for columns REAC-0, REAC-1, and REAC-2.




Figure 6. Calcium carbonate precipitated within REAC-1 column after 28 days based on XMT. The

column inlet is on the left, the exit on the right.




Figure 7. XMT small 3D volumes (256×256×128 pixels) of the sample REAC-1 showing the

precipitation of calcite and the shift of the fluid-rock interface. (a) Sample before experiment,

showing glass beads (royal blue) and calcite (sky blue). (b), Sample after experiment, (c) Sample
after experiment, showing the displacement of the fluid-rock interface during experiment. White

and yellow lines correspond to the position of the fluid-rock interface (in the foreground slice) at t0

and t1, respectively. Note that the interface mismatch for the right-bottom glass bead is due to bead

displacement during experiment.




Figure 8. SEM pictures of sample REAC-1 after experiment. Calcite crystals grew on glass bead

surface (a) and (b), calcite spar surface close to the sample inlet (c) and (d), and close to the sample

outlet (e) and (f).




Figure 9. XMT cross-sections of sample REAC-1 before and after experiment showing roughness

increase




Figure 10. Specific surface area changes in REAC-1 based on XMT (spatial resolution of 4.46 µm).




Figure 11. Comparison of calcite precipitation rates from this study and that of Tang et al. [2008a]




Figure 12. 10 and 30 µm boundary layers for the case of CS-4 with a bulk saturation index of 0.82.

The modeling assumes that the Tang et al. [2008a] rate applies at the mineral surface. The gradient

indicates a partial diffusion control. See text for further explanation.




Figure 13. Tang rates recalculated for a partial diffusion control assuming a 30 µm thick

hydrodynamic boundary layer.
Figure 14: Comparison of calcite growth rate data from Nehrke et al. [2007] (blue symbols) and

this study (red symbols and fitted curve). Nehrke et al. [2007] considered a broad range of calcium

to carbonate ion activity ratios (unlike this study), which accounts for some of the spread in their

data when plotted versus log Ω alone.




Figure 15. Fit of XMT data with the nearly linear rate expression (n = 1.12) determined in stirred

cell reactor experiments from this study and using a constant initial specific surface area of 0.012

m2∙g-1.




Figure 16. Reactive transport simulation matching of XMT profiles (red data points) of newly

precipitated calcium carbonate with a specific surface area of 0.21 m2∙g-1. Plug-flow column inlet is

on the left. (a) Simulated profile (dark blue solid line) with n = 1.12 using Eq. 15, (b) simulated

profile (dark blue solid line) with model fit to Tang et al. [2008a] data, n = 3.20 (Eq. 17), and (c)

simulated profile (dark blue solid line) with model fit to Tang data adjusted for a partial diffusion

control based on a 30 µm hydrodynamic boundary layer (Eq. 18).




Figure 17. (a) Comparison of simulated profile of newly precipitated calcium carbonate with XMT

data when two parallel rate laws are combined: 1) a partially diffusion controlled modification of

the higher order rate expression suggested by Tang et al. [2008a] data, and 2) the nearly linear

(n=1.12) multi-sourced spiral growth mechanism suggested by the stirred cell experiments in this

study. The rates fromTang et al. [2008a], however, need to be slowed even beyond the modification

imposed by a partial diffusion control in order to result in a reasonable match with the data. (b)
Postulated precipitation rate regimes based on plug-flow column experiments: spiral growth

controlled (dark solid line) vs nucleation control (grey solid line).
Table 1. Chemical composition of initial calcite material.

        Element             [Ca]     [Mg] [Sr] [Ba]        [K] [Na] [Si]   [Al] [Rb]


Concentration (% weight) 39.33       0.14 0.02 0.27 0.08 0.03 1.52 0.03 0.02




Table 2. Summary of the continuously-stirred precipitation experiments

     Experiment         SC-1       SC-2    SC-3    SC-4


         pHin            8.16      8.41    8.25    8.20


        pHout            7.97      7.99    8.032   7.89


   DICina (mmol∙l-1)    2.120      4.077   2.987   6.278


   DICout (mmol∙l-1)    1.987      3.509   2.709   4.942


   Cainc (mmol∙l-1)     1.071      2.043   1.436   4.000


   Caoutd (mmol∙l-1)    0.938      1.475   1.158   2.664


    ΔCa (mmol∙l-1)      0.133      0.568   0.278   1.336


    Calcite Ppt (g)     0.0046 0.0143 0.0033 0.0192


Calcite SSAfinf (m2∙g-1) 0.013     0.015   0.013   0.016


    aCa 2+ / aCO32−      94.9      74.7    70.9    115


       Log Ωe            0.15      0.57    0.42    0.82


  Log R (mol∙m-2∙s-1)   -8.89      -8.26   -8.49   -7.91
a. DIC in well-mixed stock solution based on average of 3 Na analyses by ICP-MS, with assumption that

total Na = total Dissolved Inorganic Carbonate (DIC).


b. DIC from effluent not measured directly, but estimated by subtracting the Ca precipitated in the reactor

(ΔCa = ΔDIC) from the DIC in the well-mixed stock solution.


c. Average of 3-4 ICP-MS measurements of total Ca in well mixed stock.


d. Average of 5-15 Ca values determined by ICP-MS at steady state


e. Calculated with CrunchFlow using the EQ3 database (Wolery et al. [1990]). Makes use of the extended

Debye-Huckel model for activity corrections. Thermodynamic data at 22°C given in Table 3.


f. Final surface area calculated from the weighted fraction of original Iceland spar (1.0 g) and the new

calcite precipitate using a multipoint krypton gas BET method.
Table 3. Thermodynamic data at 22°C used in simulations. Note that the primary species used in

the calculation are Ca2+ and CO32-.

        Species                    Log K                 Species                Log K


        HCO3-                     -10.352                 CO2(aq)              -16.712


        CaCl+                     0.70339               CaCO3(aq)              -3.2881


       CaCl2(aq)                  0.64203               CaHCO3+                -11.393


        HCl(aq)                   -0.69908               NaCO3-                -0.54579


        NaCl(aq)                  0.79087               NaHCO3(aq)             -10.532


       NaOH(aq)                   14.894                  Calcite              -8.4521


         OH-                      14.091                 Vaterite               -7.927




Table 4. Composition of the plug-flow columns.

    Sample name          REAC-0        REAC-1    REAC-2


       mass (g)          0.5767        0.6300    0.6541


     calcite (%w)           0               25     25


   glass beads (%w)        100              75     75
Table 5. Composition of the inlet fluid after mixing for the plug-flow column experiments

    Sample name         REAC-0        REAC-1         REAC-2


    CaCl2 (mM)         2.0 ± 0.1      2.0 ± 0.1      1.0 ± 0.1


   NaHCO3 (mM)         4.0 ± 0.1      4.0 ± 0.1      2.0 ± 0.1


       Log Ω              1.44          1.44           0.69


        pHin              8.70          8.70           8.45




Table 6. Diffusion coefficients used in reactive transport modelling

      Ion         Di (×105 cm2∙s-1)         Ion           Di (×105 cm2∙s-1)


      H+               9.31*               OH-                   5.27*


     Na+               1.33*                Cl-                  2.03*


     Ca2+             0.793*              HCO3-                  1.18*


    CO2(aq)             1.00              CO32-                  0.955*


    CaCl2+              1.00             CaCl2(aq)                1.00


   CaCO3(aq)            1.00            CaHCO3+                   1.00


    NaCO3-              1.00           NaHCO3(aq)                 1.00


*Data from Lasaga [1998]; otherwise a value is assumed.
Table 7. 25°C calcite precipitation rates from Tang et al. [2008a] recalculated for a partial diffusion

control assuming a 30 µm thick hydrodynamic boundary layer.
               a
                   log Ω (at   b
                                   log Ω (bulk   c
                                                     Crystal surface    d
                                                                         Bulk rate     log crystal surface   log bulk rate

            crystal surface)       solution)     rate (mol∙m-2∙s-1)    (mol∙m-2∙s-1)   rate (mol∙m-2∙s-1)    (mol∙m-2∙s-1)


 Tang-11            0.963            1.192            1.156×10-6       7.330×10-6            -5.937             -5.135


 Tang-12            0.922            1.095            8.260×10-7       3.396×10-6            -6.083             -5.469


 Tang-13            0.928            1.108            8.649×10-7       3.771×10-6            -6.063             -5.424


 Tang-14            0.836            0.931            3.986×10-7       8.868×10-7            -6.399             -6.052


 Tang-15            0.638            0.660            6.630×10-8       8.171×10-8            -7.178             -7.088


 Tang-16            0.806            0.882            3.059×10-7       5.882×10-7            -6.514             -6.230


 Tang-17            0.630            0.651            6.146×10-8       7.490×10-8            -7.211             -7.126


 Tang-18            0.655            0.680            7.794×10-8       9.837×10-8            -7.108             -7.007


 Tang-19            0.965            1.200            1.182×10-6       7.806×10-6            -5.927             -5.108


 Tang-20            0.929            1.111            8.707×10-7       3.844×10-6            -6.060             -5.415


 Tang-21            0.977            1.233            1.302×10-6       1.010×10-5            -5.885             -4.995


 Tang-22            0.912            1.073            7.551×10-7       2.834×10-6            -6.122             -5.548


 Tang-23            0.735            0.780            1.630×10-7       2.443×10-7            -6.788             -6.612


   a. Saturation index calculated with the Tang et al [2008a] surface reaction rate (Eq. 17) and

       multicomponent diffusion across a 30 μm hydrodynamic boundary layer using coefficients in

       Table 6.
b. Saturation index calculated with the Tang et al [2008a] surface reaction rate (Eq. 17) assuming

   the bulk solution is present immediately adjacent to the calcite crystal (no hydrodynamic

   boundary layer).

c. Rate calculated from Eq. 17 assuming the saturation state immediately adjacent to the calcite

   surface is given by the log Ω values given in Column a.

d. Rate calculated from Eq. 17 assuming that the bulk solution (Column b) is immediately adjacent

   to the calcite surface.
                                500μm                                         400μm                                          100μm
(a)                                             (b)                                            (c)


      Figure 1. Scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of (a) glass beads and (b) and (c) calcite crystal before experiments.
                                       pH meter
                Sample

    Syringe pump
NaHCO3                               Valve cap
CaCl2                                 T-valve



Figure 2. Schematic of the plug-flow column experimental setup
(a)                                                  (b)


Figure 3. XMT cross-section (256×256 pixels) of the sample REAC-1 (a) Initial 256-grey levels image and
(b) image after segmentation, identifying porosity (black), calcite (grey) and glass bead (white).
                                               -8
                                      1.4 10


                                               -8
                                      1.2 10
   Precipitation Rate (mol.m-2.s-1)

                                               -8
                                       1 10


                                               -9
                                       8 10


                                               -9
                                       6 10


                                               -9
                                       4 10


                                               -9
                                       2 10


                                               0
                                                    0   0.2   0.4     0.6   0.8   1

                                                              Log Ω

Figure 4. Saturation index (log Ω) versus rate for the stirred cell experiments in this study
                                                      Effluent Ca                                                             Effluent pH
                          2.5                                                                     9.5
                                    (a)                                      REAC-0                         (b)                                   REAC-0
                                                                             REAC-1                                                               REAC-1
Concentration (×10-3 M)




                                                                             REAC-2                                                               REAC-2
                                    Inlet REAC-0 and REAC-1
                           2                                                                        9

                                                                                                              Inlet REAC-0 and REAC-1




                                                                                             pH
                                                                                                                                             Inlet REAC-2
                          1.5                                                                     8.5



                                    Inlet REAC-2
                           1                                                                        8




                          0.5                                                                     7.5
                                0         100   200     300    400     500     600     700              0         100   200    300   400    500   600   700
                                                        Time (h)                                                              Time (h)


                                    Figure 5. Changes in effluent Ca (a) and pH (b) for columns REAC-0, REAC-1, and REAC-2.
                                 8


                                 7
                                              Column Inlet
                                 6
Volume % Calcite Precipitated




                                 5


                                 4


                                 3


                                 2


                                 1


                                 0
                                     0    2       4          6    8   10     12
                                                    s
                                                  Distance (mm)

                                Figure 6. Calcium carbonate precipitated within REAC-1 column after 28 days based on XMT. The column inlet
                                is on the left, the exit on the right.
 a)                                              b)                                               c)


Figure 7. XMT small 3D volumes (256×256×128 pixels) of the sample REAC-1 showing the precipitation of
calcite and the shift of the fluid-rock interface. (a) Sample before experiment, showing glass beads (royal blue)
and calcite (sky blue). (b), Sample after experiment, (c) Sample after experiment, showing the displacement of
the fluid-rock interface during experiment. White and yellow lines correspond to the position of the fluid-rock
interface (in the foreground slice) at t0 and t1, respectively. Note that the interface mismatch for the right-bottom
glass bead is due to bead displacement during experiment.
    (a)                      150 μm        (b)                       50 μm




    (c)                       150 μm      (d)                       50 μm




                                                                  spiral
                                                                  growth




    (e)                        5 μm        (f)                        2 μm


Figure 8. SEM pictures of sample REAC-1 after experiment. Calcite crystals grew on glass bead surface (a) and
(b), calcite spar surface close to the sample inlet (c) and (d), and close to the sample outlet (e) and (f).
  (a)                                1 mm          (b)


Figure 9. XMT cross-sections of sample REAC-1 before and after experiment showing roughness increase
                                  0.06



                                  0.05
Sprecific Surface Area (m2.g-1)



                                  0.04                 Final Surface Area


                                  0.03



                                  0.02                                 Initial Surface Area

                                  0.01



                                    0
                                         0   0.5   1       1.5          2        2.5         3         3.5           4
                                                          Distance (mm)

                  Figure 10. Specific surface area changes in REAC-1 based on XMT (spatial resolution of 4.46 μm).
                              -7
                      3 10


                              -7
                     2.5 10
                                                                                         Tang et al.,
                                                                                            2008
Rate (mol.m-2.s-1)




                              -7
                      2 10


                              -7
                     1.5 10


                              -7
                      1 10


                              -8
                      5 10

                                                                                                       This Study
                              0
                                   0                0.2                  0.4                  0.6                0.8
                                                       Saturation index (log Ω)

                     Figure 11. of calcite precipitation rates from this study and that of Tang et al. [2008a]
                           0.82


                                               10 μm
                            0.8            boundary layer
Saturation index (log Ω)




                           0.78




                           0.76


                                            30 μm boundary layer
                           0.74




                           0.72
                               210   215         220            225            230             235            240

                                                    Distance (μm)

      Figure 12. 10 and 30 μm boundary layers for the case of CS-4 with a bulk saturation index of 0.82.
      The modeling assumes that the Tang et al. [2008a] rate applies at the mineral surface. The gradient indicates
      a partial diffusion control. See text for further explanation.
                            -5
                     1 10




                     8 10
                            -6
                                       Surface reaction controlled
Rate (mol.m-2.s-1)




                            -6
                     6 10



                            -6
                     4 10
                                         Partial diffusion control
                                              (30 μm HDL)
                            -6
                     2 10
                                     This Study

                            0
                                 0    0.2          0.4         0.6          0.8           1          1.2          1.4
                                                   Saturation index (log Ω)


              Figure 13. Tang rates recalculated for a partial diffusion control assuming a 30 μm thick hydrodynamic boundary layer.
                            -8
                     8 10

                     7 10
                            -8
                                           Nerhke et al. [2007]
                                           Data - This study
                            -8
                     6 10                  Fit - This study
Rate (mol.m-2.s-1)




                            -8
                     5 10

                            -8
                     4 10

                            -8
                     3 10

                            -8
                     2 10

                            -8
                     1 10

                            0
                                 0   0.2       0.4    0.6       0.8   1   1.2   1.4
                                                        log Ω


Figure 14. Comparison of calcite growth rate data from Nehrke et al. [2007] (blue symbols)
and this study (red symbols and fitted curve). Nehrke et al. [2007] considered a broad range of
calcium to carbonate ion activity ratios (unlike this study), which accounts for some of the
spread in their data when plotted versus log Ω alone.
                                              8


                                              7


              Volume % Calcite Precipitated   6


                                              5           XMT data

                                              4

                                                             Model fit with constant
                                              3
                                                                0.012 m2.g-1 SSA

                                              2


                                              1


                                              0
                                                  0   2        4        6       8      10   12
                                                                Distance (mm)




Figure 15. Fit of XMT data with the nearly linear rate expression (n = 1.12) determined in stirred cell reactor
experiments from this study and using a constant initial specific surface area of 0.012 m2∙g-1.
                                8                                                         8                                               8

                                                                               (a)                                             (b)                                             (c)
                                7                 n = 1.12                                7           n = 3.20                            7               n = 2.00
                                6                                                         6                                               6
Volume % Calcite Precipitated




                                5                                                         5                                               5


                                4                                                         4                                               4


                                3                                                         3                                               3


                                2                                                         2                                               2


                                1                                                         1                                               1


                                0                                                         0                                               0
                                    0      2      4         6         8   10         12       0   2   4     6         8   10         12       0   2   4         6         8   10     12
                                                      Distance (mm)                                   Distance (mm)                                       Distance (mm)




                                        Figure 16. Reactive transport simulation matching of XMT profiles (red data points) of newly precipitated calcium
                                        carbonate with a specific surface area of 0.21 m2∙g-1. Plug flow column inlet is on the left. (a) Simulated profile
                                        (dark blue solid line) with n = 1.12 using Eq. 15, (b) simulated profile (dark blue solid line) with model fit to Tang et al. [2008a]
                                        data, n = 3.20 (Eq. 17), and (c) simulated profile (dark blue solid line) with model fit to Tang data adjusted for a partial diffusion
                                        control based on a 30 µm hydrodynamic boundary layer (Eq. 18).
                                                                                                                                               Spiral Growth               Nucleation
                                                                                                                          -8
                                                                                                                                                Controlled                 Controlled
                                8                                                                                  5 10
                                        (a)                                                                                        (b)
                                7
                                                                                                                          -8
                                                                                                                   4 10
Volume % Calcite Precipitated




                                6




                                                                                Precipitation rate (mol.m-2.s-1)
                                5                                                                                         -8
                                                                                                                   3 10

                                4

                                                                                                                   2 10
                                                                                                                          -8                                                 2D Heterogeneous
                                3
                                                                                                                                   Multi-Sourced
                                2                                                                                                  Spiral Growth
                                                                                                                          -8
                                                                                                                   1 10
                                1


                                0                                                                                         0
                                    0         2   4      6        8   10   12                                                  0         0.2    0.4   0.6      0.8   1       1.2    1.4
                                                  Distance (mm)                                                                                 Saturation index (loggΩ)



             Figure 17. (a) Comparison of simulated profile of newly precipitated calcium carbonate with XMT data when two parallel rate laws
             are combined: 1) a partially diffusion controlled modification of the higher order rate expression suggested by Tang et al. [2008a] data,
             and 2) the nearly linear (n=1.12) multi-sourced spiral growth mechanism suggested by the stirred cell experiments in this study.
             The rates fromTang et al. [2008a], however, need to be slowed even beyond the modification imposed by a partial diffusion control
             in order to result in a reasonable match with the data. (b) Postulated precipitation rate regimes based on plug flow column experiments:
             spiral growth controlled (dark solid line) vs nucleation control (grey solid line).
DISCLAIMER

This document was prepared as an account of work sponsored by the United States
Government. While this document is believed to contain correct information, neither the
United States Government nor any agency thereof, nor The Regents of the University of
California, nor any of their employees, makes any warranty, express or implied, or
assumes any legal responsibility for the accuracy, completeness, or usefulness of any
information, apparatus, product, or process disclosed, or represents that its use would not
infringe privately owned rights. Reference herein to any specific commercial product,
process, or service by its trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise, does not
necessarily constitute or imply its endorsement, recommendation, or favoring by the
United States Government or any agency thereof, or The Regents of the University of
California. The views and opinions of authors expressed herein do not necessarily state or
reflect those of the United States Government or any agency thereof or The Regents of
the University of California.

Ernest Orlando Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory is an equal opportunity
employer.
