                                                                                      J. Fluid Mech. (2018), vol. 835, pp. 363–392.   c Cambridge University Press 2017              363
                                                                                      doi:10.1017/jfm.2017.720


                                                                                              Pore-scale modelling of Ostwald ripening

                                                                                           Jacques A. de Chalendar1, †, Charlotte Garing1 and Sally M. Benson1
                                                                                                1 Department of Energy Resources Engineering, Stanford University, 473 Via Ortega,
                                                                                                                           Stanford, CA 94305-2205, USA

                                                                                                    (Received 3 April 2017; revised 18 August 2017; accepted 3 October 2017;
                                                                                                                    first published online 27 November 2017)

                                                                                      In a saturated solution with dispersed clusters of a second phase, the mechanism by
                                                                                      which the larger clusters grow at the expense of the smaller ones is called Ostwald
                                                                                      ripening. Although the mechanism is well understood in situations where multiple
                                                                                      clusters of gas exist in a liquid solution, evolution is much more complicated to
                                                                                      predict when the two phases interact with a solid matrix, since the solid plays a
                                                                                      significant role in determining the shape of the interface. In this paper, we study
                                                                                      capillary dominated regimes in porous media where the driving force is inter-cluster
                                                                                      diffusion. By decomposing the Ostwald ripening mechanism into two processes that
                                                                                      operate on different time scales – the diffusion of solute gas in the liquid and the
                                                                                      readjustment of the shape of the gas–liquid interface to accommodate a change in
                                                                                      mass – we develop a sequential algorithm to solve for the evolution of systems with
                                                                                      multiple gas ganglia. In the absence of a solid matrix, thermodynamic equilibrium is
                                                                                      reached when all of the gas phase aggregates to form one large bubble. In porous
                                                                                      media on the other hand, we find that ripening can lead to equilibrium situations
                                                                                      with multiple disconnected ganglia, and that evolution is highly dependent on initial
                                                                                      conditions and the structure of the solid matrix. The fundamental difference between
                                                                                      the two cases is in the relationship between mass and capillary pressure.
                                                                                      Key words: bubble dynamics, capillary flows, porous media
https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2017.720 Published online by Cambridge University Press




                                                                                      1. Introduction
                                                                                        In a homogeneous medium where dispersed clusters of a second phase exist in a
                                                                                      saturated solution, Ostwald ripening is the mechanism by which the larger clusters
                                                                                      grow at the expense of the smaller ones. The mechanism is well understood both
                                                                                      in solids, e.g. for crystallization of rocks, and in bulk (or free) liquid solutions
                                                                                      (Epstein & Plesset 1950; Greenwood 1956; Lifshitz & Slyozov 1961; Voorhees 1985;
                                                                                      Schmelzer & Schweitzer 1987) and is driven by capillary pressure differences that
                                                                                      cause inter-cluster diffusion through a saturated solution. In the case of a solid porous
                                                                                      matrix filled with an immobile saturated solution however, the evolution of clusters
                                                                                      of a second phase is much more difficult to predict. Pore-scale capillary pressure,
                                                                                      the difference between the wetting and non-wetting phase pressures on both sides
                                                                                      of an interface, remains linked to the shape of the clusters by Laplace’s law along
                                                                                      the unsupported interfaces between the two phases, but is now determined by the

                                                                                                       † Email address for correspondence: jdechalendar@stanford.edu
                                                                                      364                 J. A. de Chalendar, C. Garing and S. M. Benson
                                                                                      geometry of the pore space (Bear 1972), which can be extremely complex in real
                                                                                      rocks, as shown by recent advances in microtomography imaging (Blunt et al. 2013;
                                                                                      Cnudde & Boone 2013; Schlüter et al. 2014). In this paper we specifically explore
                                                                                      the impact of pore structure on Ostwald ripening in a supercritical CO2 -water system.
                                                                                         An application of particular interest to the authors is that of residual trapping in
                                                                                      the context of carbon capture and storage (Bachu 2008; Benson & Cole 2008).
                                                                                      Previous studies (Iglauer et al. 2011; Tanino & Blunt 2012; Chaudhary et al.
                                                                                      2013; Georgiadis et al. 2013; Andrew, Bijeljic & Blunt 2014b; Geistlinger et al.
                                                                                      2014; Rahman et al. 2016) established that CO2 can be locally trapped in the
                                                                                      pore space by the residual trapping mechanism and that the trapped CO2 phase
                                                                                      takes the form of disconnected ganglia with irregular shapes and varying sizes that
                                                                                      can occupy one or multiple pores, as evidenced by microtomography imaging (a
                                                                                      visualization of trapped fluids in a rock is shown in figure 1a). In particular the
                                                                                      authors reported power-law correlations for CO2 cluster size distributions showing
                                                                                      that a large number of very small clusters are observed and only few large clusters,
                                                                                      although the large clusters represent the bulk of the phase volume. Since pore-scale
                                                                                      capillary pressure gradients are the driver for the Ostwald ripening process, interfacial
                                                                                      curvature measurements of residually trapped CO2 ganglia can be used to estimate
                                                                                      the potential for the mechanism (Armstrong, Porter & Wildenschild 2012; Andrew,
                                                                                      Bijeljic & Blunt 2014a; Garing et al. 2017a). Garing et al. (2017b) conducted a
                                                                                      scCO2 /brine drainage-imbibition experiment in a Boise sandstone (90 bars, 323 K)
                                                                                      with repeated synchrotron-based X-ray microtomography imaging (3.24 µm voxel
                                                                                      size) over a period of 31 h after imbibition stops, in order to visualize and quantify
                                                                                      the temporal evolution of residually trapped scCO2 ganglia within the pore space of
                                                                                      the imaged rock sample. The data suggest constant fluid displacement and fluid phase
                                                                                      redistribution following the imbibition process caused by the interplay of different
                                                                                      mechanisms, potentially including Ostwald ripening, as depicted in figure 1(b). Even
                                                                                      more recently, Schlüter et al. (2017) studied the pore-scale relaxation dynamics of
                                                                                      fluid interfaces in a glass bead pack after a drainage process and also found that fluid
                                                                                      phase redistribution continues long after the time at which equilibrium is typically
                                                                                      declared in two-phase experiments for which a flux boundary condition is changed
                                                                                      from flow to no flow.
                                                                                         The aim of this paper is to provide the modelling tools to study the evolution of
https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2017.720 Published online by Cambridge University Press




                                                                                      a system of ganglia governed by the ripening mechanism in order to determine the
                                                                                      permanence of residual trapping. To simplify the problem, we specifically consider
                                                                                      the case of residually trapped CO2 ganglia that occupy one pore, as in figure 1(a),
                                                                                      and explore the issue of whether stability is possible in such systems and the time
                                                                                      scales over which these systems evolve.
                                                                                         In the rare occasions where the Ostwald ripening mechanism is considered in
                                                                                      porous media settings, other mechanisms like a constant pressure decline in the liquid
                                                                                      play a disproportionate role (Li & Yortsos 1995; Dominguez, Bories & Prat 2000),
                                                                                      or cluster growth is strongly inhibited once there is significant interaction with the
                                                                                      porous matrix walls (for viscous polymers and crystals growing in a solid matrix, e.g.
                                                                                      in Schmelzer et al. 1995; Möller, Jacob & Schmelzer 1998). Goldobin & Brilliantov
                                                                                      (2011) investigated the diffusion of gas in porous media using large-scale modelling
                                                                                      of averaged thermodynamic properties, but did not model local geometry effects at
                                                                                      the pore scale. Recent advances in pore-scale modelling (Meakin & Tartakovsky
                                                                                      2009; Blunt et al. 2013) provide tools to strengthen our understanding of single
                                                                                      and multiphase flow, but they are less suited to the modelling of a phenomenon
                                                                                      where the only transport mechanism is inter-cluster diffusion. A first class of tools
                                                                                                           Pore-scale modelling of Ostwald ripening                        365

                                                                                                         (a)




                                                                                          (b)

                                                                                                                                  7h
https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2017.720 Published online by Cambridge University Press




                                                                                      F IGURE 1. Visualization of trapped fluids in Boise sandstones. (a) Three-dimensional
                                                                                      surface visualization of trapped wetting (blue) and non-wetting (red) phases in a Boise
                                                                                      sandstone (data from the water–air gravity-driven imbibition experiments described in
                                                                                      Garing et al. (2017a), sample is 530 × 515 × 255 µm). (b) Three-dimensional visualization
                                                                                      of residual scCO2 ganglia (different disconnected ganglia are represented with different
                                                                                      colours) trapped in a Boise sandstone after brine imbibition (data from the scCO2 /brine
                                                                                      imbibition experiment with time-lapse imaging after imbibition stops, as described in
                                                                                      Garing et al. 2017b). The data illustrate the disappearance of a scCO2 bubble together
                                                                                      with nearby scCO2 ganglia coalescence within a period of time of 7 h.


                                                                                      discretizes the void space to compute flow and transport directly on a grid. Popular
                                                                                      methods include particle-based methods (e.g. lattice Boltzmann (Chen & Doolen 1998;
                                                                                      McClure et al. 2016a)); continuum methods that solve the Navier–Stokes equations
                                                                                      using standard discretization schemes and different approaches to interface tracking
                                                                                      366                 J. A. de Chalendar, C. Garing and S. M. Benson
                                                                                      (e.g. volume-of-fluid (Hirt & Nichols 1981; Raeini, Blunt & Bijeljic 2012) or level
                                                                                      set (Osher & Sethian 1988; Sussman, Smereka & Osher 1994; Prodanović & Bryant
                                                                                      2006)); or more recently combinations of particle-based and continuum methods (e.g.
                                                                                      McClure et al. 2016b). However, one of the main drawbacks of grid-based higher
                                                                                      fidelity simulations at very low capillary numbers is that spurious currents can make
                                                                                      the simulations inconsistent and unphysical (in the case of volume-of-fluid methods),
                                                                                      or that mass is not always rigorously conserved (in the case of level-set methods).
                                                                                      Another common drawback of direct modelling approaches is their computational cost.
                                                                                      This is in contrast to the large body of work on pore network modelling approaches
                                                                                      in which the geometry of the pore space and physical processes are largely simplified
                                                                                      (Fatt 1956; Dias & Payatakes 1986a; Pereira et al. 1996; Bakke & Øren 1997;
                                                                                      Øren et al. 1998; Fischer & Celia 1999; Blunt 2001; Sok et al. 2002; Valvatne
                                                                                      & Blunt 2003; Joekar-Niasar, Hassanizadeh & Leijnse 2008; Idowu & Blunt 2010;
                                                                                      Joekar-Niasar, Hassanizadeh & Dahle 2010), which is why we choose this approach
                                                                                      in the work presented here.
                                                                                         A key component of this approach is the generation of pore networks that are
                                                                                      representative of real rocks, either directly from pore space images (e.g. by applying
                                                                                      a thinning method to extract the skeleton or medial axis as in Lindquist et al. (1996),
                                                                                      or by using a maximal ball algorithm as in Silin & Patzek 2006), by process-based
                                                                                      reconstruction (Øren & Bakke 2002) or by some method that uses random number
                                                                                      generators to produce networks that are statistically representative of real rocks (Sok
                                                                                      et al. 2002; Arns et al. 2004). More recently, Idowu (2009) built on Sok et al.
                                                                                      (2002) and Arns et al. (2004) to propose an algorithm that can generate a network of
                                                                                      arbitrary size using as inputs pore body and throat size distributions and connectivity.
                                                                                      In the appendix to this paper we present a technique that goes one step further in
                                                                                      matching statistical properties extracted from real rocks. The algorithm we propose
                                                                                      can be used to generate networks of arbitrary size, and matches target distributions
                                                                                      for pore body and throat radius, for coordination number and for throat length. Body
                                                                                      and throat radii and body radius and coordination number are also correlated using
                                                                                      greedy heuristics (it would not be difficult to modify the algorithm to use additional
                                                                                      information on these correlations if it were available). Ensuring the throat lengths are
                                                                                      as realistic as possible is crucial in our application where diffusion paths have a high
                                                                                      impact on evolution.
https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2017.720 Published online by Cambridge University Press




                                                                                         Pore-scale modelling approaches are usually designed to study situations where
                                                                                      there is advective transport of a fluid, be it single or multiphase. For the Ostwald
                                                                                      ripening mechanism, we model a situation where there is negligible advection (at
                                                                                      most there are quasi-static displacements, as in Dias & Payatakes 1986b). Accordingly,
                                                                                      Fickian diffusion of gas between the clusters is the only type of transport we
                                                                                      consider, and we adapt the classical pore network modelling approach to our setting
                                                                                      by tracking only the interfaces between the liquid and gas phases. The ripening
                                                                                      mechanism can be decomposed into two processes operating on different time
                                                                                      scales: the diffusion of solute gas through the liquid and the readjustment of the
                                                                                      CO2 -brine interfaces to accommodate changes in mass. In the geological storage
                                                                                      setting, the diffusivity of CO2 in brine is around 3.64 × 10−9 m2 s−1 (Cadogan,
                                                                                      Maitland & Trusler 2014), to be compared to the product of the speed of sound in
                                                                                      supercritical carbon dioxide with the typical length of a gas ganglion in porous media,
                                                                                      ∼300 m s−1 ∗ 100 × 10−6 m = 0.03 m2 s−1 (Estrada-Alexanders & Trusler 1998); and
                                                                                      we will therefore assume that interface readjustment is instantaneous relative to the
                                                                                      diffusive transport of solute CO2 . This allows us to propose a simple sequential
                                                                                      method to solving for evolution.
                                                                                                           Pore-scale modelling of Ostwald ripening                       367
                                                                                        To summarize, three main contributions are made in this paper: (i) a significant
                                                                                      extension to the classic pore network modelling framework to allow key physical
                                                                                      variables to vary continuously within the pore space, (ii) an algorithmic approach in
                                                                                      pore network models to solving for evolution of capillary pressure dominated regimes
                                                                                      where the driving force is inter-cluster diffusion and (iii) insights on the fundamental
                                                                                      difference in the relationship between mass and capillary pressure of a gas cluster in
                                                                                      the capillary tube and porous media settings. Additionally, we apply these methods to
                                                                                      some realistic geometries to estimate the extent and the rate of ripening for a typical
                                                                                      CO2 storage scenario.
                                                                                        This work builds on the framework introduced in de Chalendar (2016a), de
                                                                                      Chalendar, Garing & Benson (2017).

                                                                                      2. Governing equations for Ostwald ripening
                                                                                                        2.1. Comparison of the framework to previous work
                                                                                      As was mentioned in § 1, the Ostwald ripening problem has been extensively studied,
                                                                                      in particular in the case of a free liquid solution. The problem we study here is quite
                                                                                      different from the one that is typically studied, and consequently our approach is to
                                                                                      capture individual bubble dynamics rather than the mean behaviour of a population of
                                                                                      bubbles.
                                                                                         We highlight the foundational equations for the classical Ostwald ripening theories
                                                                                      in appendix A. Previous work on the Ostwald ripening problem (Greenwood 1956;
                                                                                      Lifshitz & Slyozov 1961; Voorhees 1985; Schmelzer & Schweitzer 1987; Schmelzer
                                                                                      et al. 1995) is commonly based on the Ostwald–Freundlich equation, itself based on a
                                                                                      relation between a liquid and its vapour (Thomson 1872), and assumes the gas follows
                                                                                      the ideal gas law.
                                                                                         A major breakthrough in the study of the Ostwald ripening phenomenon was the
                                                                                      seminal paper by Lifschitz and Slyozov (Lifshitz & Slyozov 1961), who consider
                                                                                      a slightly supersaturated solution, and were able to make quantitative predictions
                                                                                      on the asymptotic behaviour of coarsening systems without explicitly solving the
                                                                                      relevant equations. They consider diffusion currents of solute between the grains
                                                                                      and the solution, and use a variation of the Ostwald–Freundlich equation (for
                                                                                      concentration), Fick’s law for diffusion and conservation of mass (assuming that no
https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2017.720 Published online by Cambridge University Press




                                                                                      new particles appear) to derive a governing equation for a particle radius distribution
                                                                                      function. At long times, it is then shown that this equation simplifies to an ordinary
                                                                                      differential equation, which can be solved to make predictions on the long-term
                                                                                      evolution of the mean and critical radii. We note that the Lifschitz–Slyozov, or
                                                                                      Lifschitz–Slyozov–Wagner (LSW) theory, like Greenwood (1956), considers that
                                                                                      grains are far enough apart that a spherical diffusion regime can be considered, and
                                                                                      establishes asymptotic results on the evolution of the radius distribution function.
                                                                                      A review of this classical theory and of subsequent results is given in Voorhees
                                                                                      (1985). Some attempts were later made to extend this theory to porous media, e.g. in
                                                                                      Schmelzer et al. (1995), which builds off the same equations as in the LSW theory
                                                                                      but then assumes growth stops or is strongly inhibited as soon as the growing grains
                                                                                      start interacting with the solid matrix.
                                                                                         In contrast, in this work we consider a solution of brine that is initially saturated
                                                                                      with CO2 . The CO2 is supercritical in our conditions, so that the ideal gas law, and
                                                                                      consequently the Ostwald–Freundlich equation, may not be used. Additionally, the gas
                                                                                      ganglia are much closer then in the classic ripening theories (the distance between
                                                                                      two ganglia is of the same order as the size of the ganglia), and diffusion paths are
                                                                                      368                      J. A. de Chalendar, C. Garing and S. M. Benson

                                                                                                                                      (b)                     Rock
                                                                                            (a)
                                                                                                                                                      R
                                                                                                                    A
                                                                                                                                             Gas                     Liquid
                                                                                                                                                          r

                                                                                                        Bubble a         Bubble b




                                                                                                  (c)




                                                                                      F IGURE 2. Comparing the capillary tube and porous media cases – figures 1 and 2 from
                                                                                      de Chalendar et al. (2017). (a) Idealized setting for Ostwald ripening in the capillary
                                                                                      tube case. (b) Meniscus in a conical capillary (adapted from Dullien 2012, figure 2.11).
                                                                                      (c) Simple two-bubble system in a porous medium, at disequilibrium and at equilibrium
                                                                                      states.


                                                                                      constrained by the morphology of the rock structure, so that a spherical diffusion
                                                                                      regime may not be considered. The system is typically initialized such that the ganglia
                                                                                      are already interacting with the solid matrix, as shown in the microtomography image
                                                                                      in figure 1(a). As such, in our framework we only consider pairwise interactions
                                                                                      between ganglia, and do not use the mean-field approximation that was popularized
                                                                                      by the LSW theory when considering ripening.
                                                                                         In the remainder of this section, we derive the governing equations for the Ostwald
                                                                                      ripening problem in our setting.

                                                                                                                     2.2. Capillary tube case
https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2017.720 Published online by Cambridge University Press




                                                                                      We first consider the case of an initially saturated solution, where two spherical
                                                                                      bubbles of gas – denoted by a and b in the following – appear at t = 0 in a capillary
                                                                                      tube, as shown in figure 2(a). The bubbles are constrained to be immobile, but mass
                                                                                      can be transferred to the surrounding liquid by dissolution or exsolution. There is no
                                                                                      interaction between the solid and the walls (the only role of the tube is to constrain
                                                                                      diffusion paths to one-dimensional, rectilinear flow). We assume that the bubbles are
                                                                                      at both mechanical and thermodynamic equilibrium with their immediate surroundings.
                                                                                      We will refer to this setting as the capillary tube case. The ripening mechanism in
                                                                                      this case is well described by three basic laws. Capillary pressure, or the difference
                                                                                      in pressure between the gas and the liquid, is related to the shape of the interface
                                                                                      by Laplace’s law, a statement of mechanical equilibrium of the gas bubble with the
                                                                                      surrounding liquid:
                                                                                                                                      2σ
                                                                                                                         Pa,b = Pl +      ,                             (2.1)
                                                                                                                                     Ra,b
                                                                                      where Pa,b is the pressure of the gas in bubble a, b; Pl is the pressure inside the liquid;
                                                                                      σ is the interfacial tension and Ra,b is the radius of bubble a, b. We next consider that
                                                                                                           Pore-scale modelling of Ostwald ripening                       369
                                                                                      bubble a, b is at local thermodynamic equilibrium with its immediate surroundings.
                                                                                      Since the solute CO2 is dilute in the brine (in the geological storage setting, CO2
                                                                                      concentrations are not expected to rise above 5 % in mass (Kohl & Nielsen 1997)) we
                                                                                      can apply Henry’s law, a first-order Taylor series expansion of the relation between
                                                                                      pressure in the gas and concentration of solute in the liquid:

                                                                                                                            Pa,b = HCa,b ,                               (2.2)

                                                                                      where Ca,b is the concentration of dissolved gas in the liquid at the interface between
                                                                                      the liquid and bubble a, b and H is Henry’s constant (we assume that we can use the
                                                                                      same value of Henry’s constant for both bubbles). We can then use this to replace
                                                                                      Pa,b in (2.1):
                                                                                                                                      2σ
                                                                                                                        HCa,b = Pl +      .                              (2.3)
                                                                                                                                     Ra,b
                                                                                      With the concentrations in kg m−3 , we assume that the mass transfer rate of the
                                                                                      dissolved gas in the liquid is governed to a first order by Fick’s law according to:
                                                                                                                  ∂ma,b      ∂Ca,b    A
                                                                                                                        = DA       ≈ D 1Ca,b ,                           (2.4)
                                                                                                                   ∂t         ∂r      x
                                                                                      where ma,b is mass inside bubble a, b; 1Ca = Cb − Ca = −1Cb is the difference in
                                                                                      concentration between bubbles a, b; D is the diffusivity; A/x is the effective area-to-
                                                                                      length ratio of the diffusion path between the two bubbles. We make the additional
                                                                                      assumptions that the density ρ (for a 1 µm bubble in a 15 MPa solution at 323 K, the
                                                                                      change in density after considering capillary pressure is 0.2 % according to Linstrom
                                                                                      & Mallard 2005) and temperature T of the gas are constant. In the capillary tube case,
                                                                                      the bubbles are not in contact with the tube walls, so that we can also clearly relate
                                                                                      the mass of a spherical bubble to its radius:
                                                                                                                      ∂ma,b            ∂Ra,b
                                                                                                                            = 4πρR2a,b       .                           (2.5)
                                                                                                                       ∂t               ∂t
                                                                                      Combining the equations above leads us to a coupled system of equations for the
https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2017.720 Published online by Cambridge University Press




                                                                                      evolution of the radii Ra,b :

                                                                                                                    ∂Ra   α
                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                              1    1
                                                                                                                        = 2     −      ,
                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                     ∂t
                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                         Ra Rb Ra 
                                                                                                                                                                (2.6)
                                                                                                                    ∂Rb   α
                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                              1    1
                                                                                                                                       ,
                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                        = 2     −
                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                     ∂t
                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                         Rb Ra Rb

                                                                                      where we introduced the coefficient
                                                                                                                          1 A Dσ
                                                                                                                    α=                 (m4 s−1 ).                        (2.7)
                                                                                                                         2πρ x H
                                                                                      Note that α depends on time through the effective area-to-length ratio for diffusion
                                                                                      (A/x)(t). This coupled system of equations shows that a two-bubble system is
                                                                                      thermodynamically unstable, and that a key driver for the ripening mechanism is the
                                                                                      difference in partial pressures, or equivalently capillary pressures (since the pressure
                                                                                      in the brine is assumed to be uniform), of the two gas bubbles. Even a slight
                                                                                      370                 J. A. de Chalendar, C. Garing and S. M. Benson
                                                                                      difference in the interface radii can only amplify in time until the smaller radius goes
                                                                                      to zero. A multi-bubble situation is unstable because a decrease in mass leads to an
                                                                                      increase in capillary pressure which only reinforces the capillary pressure gradient.
                                                                                      The system can be made dimensionless by introducing the initial mean radius R̄0 and
                                                                                      dimensionless radii R∗a,b = Ra,b /R̄0 :

                                                                                                                    ∂R∗a    λ
                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                  1     1
                                                                                                                         = ∗ 2        − ∗ ,
                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                     ∂t   (Ra )     ∗          
                                                                                                                                  Rb Ra 
                                                                                                                                                                          (2.8)
                                                                                                                    ∂R∗b    λ
                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                  1     1
                                                                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                         = ∗ 2        −        
                                                                                                                     ∂t   (Rb )
                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                         ∗
                                                                                                                                  R∗a Rb
                                                                                                                                               

                                                                                      where λ has the dimension of a frequency:
                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                        σ
                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                    1        DA                      1
                                                                                                                λ=                                               .        (2.9)
                                                                                                                   2π         x        H R¯0       ρ R¯0
                                                                                                                                                         3



                                                                                      The first term (DA/x) is a characteristic flow rate for the diffusion process. The second
                                                                                      one is characteristic of the dissolution process, since σ /R̄0 scales with the pressure
                                                                                      exercised by capillary forces on a gas sphere of radius R̄0 , so that σ /H R̄0 scales with
                                                                                      the concentration of CO2 in the brine at equilibrium; and ρ R̄30 is the mass in a sphere
                                                                                      of radius R̄0 .
                                                                                         We must now choose how to estimate the effective area-to-length ratio for Fickian
                                                                                      diffusion A/x. Unlike in most previous work on Ostwald ripening (see appendix A),
                                                                                      we choose not to use a spherical regime for the diffusion process, because (i) we are
                                                                                      ultimately trying to model a porous media situation as in figure 2 where the solid
                                                                                      matrix constrains diffusion paths, and (ii) we cannot ignore the interactions between
                                                                                      the ganglia since in our application the distance between the ganglia is of the same
                                                                                      order as their size. Consequently, we choose the ratio of the projection of the smaller
                                                                                      bubble on the larger one to the distance between the two bubbles as the area-to-length
                                                                                      ratio, as shown in figure 2(a).
                                                                                         So far we have considered only two bubbles of gas. In the remainder of this paper,
                                                                                      we will assume that we can superpose pairwise interactions between multiple ganglia
https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2017.720 Published online by Cambridge University Press




                                                                                      and extend the capillary tube approach to describe the ripening mechanism in porous
                                                                                      media, as described in the following section.

                                                                                                                    2.3. Porous medium case
                                                                                      In the porous medium case, we again assume there is local mechanical and
                                                                                      thermodynamic equilibrium near each gas ganglion, so we can apply Laplace’s and
                                                                                      Henry’s laws, and that the diffusion process is well described by Fick’s law along
                                                                                      tubes of uniform cross-sectional area between the ganglia. The only modification
                                                                                      will be to the relation between interface radius and capillary pressure, to account
                                                                                      for the interaction with the solid matrix, so when they interact with the solid, the
                                                                                      ganglia may no longer be spherical. We assume that the solid matrix can locally be
                                                                                      approximated as a conical frustum as shown in figure 2(b), so that Laplace’s law and
                                                                                      geometric considerations can be used to derive the following relation:
                                                                                                                                       r
                                                                                                                          R=                 ,                           (2.10)
                                                                                                                                  cos(θ + φ)
                                                                                                            Pore-scale modelling of Ostwald ripening                          371




                                                                                                            Throat 2                    Throat 1
                                                                                                                                                         Body 2
                                                                                                                          Body 1

                                                                                      F IGURE 3. Two-dimensional representation of a simplistic continuous pore network model.
                                                                                      The different colours for pore number 1 correspond to the different cases for the solution
                                                                                      to the internal equilibrium problem in § 4.2: the ganglion is spherical and does not interact
                                                                                      with the walls in the green zone, starts to protrude into the throat and interact with the
                                                                                      porous matrix in the grey zone, and has invaded the throat in the orange zone.


                                                                                      where θ is the contact angle and φ is the angle at the summit of the cone. Figure 2(c)
                                                                                      provides an idealized representation of gas ganglia in a porous medium. In the
                                                                                      disequilibrium situation on the left, the curvatures and hence capillary pressures are
                                                                                      different, whereas they are equal on the right. The equilibrium situation on the right
                                                                                      is stable since a perturbation to the system will cause mass transfers that will bring
                                                                                      it back to the configuration where the curvature of the two ganglia is the same.
                                                                                         In § 3, we describe how we represent the pore space using continuous pore network
                                                                                      models. In § 4 we derive an algorithmic framework and detail how it is implemented
                                                                                      in this study.

                                                                                      3. Representation of continuous pore network models
                                                                                                                           3.1. Motivation
                                                                                      As in classic pore network modelling, we choose to represent the pore space using
                                                                                      pore bodies which describe the larger voids in the rock and are connected by narrower
                                                                                      pathways called throats. The pore space is represented as an undirected graph whose
                                                                                      vertices are bodies and edges are throats. In classical pore network modelling however,
                                                                                      physical variables such as pressure are usually assumed to be uniform within a throat
                                                                                      or a body. A situation like the one in figure 2 where the capillary pressure varies
                                                                                      continuously cannot be captured, which is why the traditional pore network modelling
                                                                                      framework must be extended in this work. Key physical variables are allowed to vary
https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2017.720 Published online by Cambridge University Press




                                                                                      continuously within the pore space, and throats are relaxed from cylindrical tubes
                                                                                      to tubes that are the unions of conical frustums as shown in figure 3. This allows
                                                                                      for a precise description of the location and shape of gas–liquid interfaces, which
                                                                                      is necessary to correctly model the Ostwald ripening mechanism. Additionally an
                                                                                      algorithm to generate pore network models that are statistically representative of the
                                                                                      geometry of real rocks was developed and is described in appendix B. This algorithm
                                                                                      can stochastically generate networks of arbitrary size whose statistical properties
                                                                                      (body radius, throat radius, throat length, coordination number) match those of a real
                                                                                      rock.

                                                                                                                       3.2. Elements of the pore space
                                                                                      3.2.1. Bodies
                                                                                        The nodes of the graph are what we call pore bodies. A pore body is assumed
                                                                                      to be spherical and each body has a position and a radius. The choice of a sphere
                                                                                      to represent pore bodies is guided by the physical process we are modelling: in the
                                                                                      absence of interactions with the walls, the shape of a gas cluster will be spherical.
                                                                                      372                 J. A. de Chalendar, C. Garing and S. M. Benson
                                                                                      In other words, the pore bodies that are represented in this manner are not necessarily
                                                                                      spherical, but the radius we are assigning to each body is really the radius of the
                                                                                      largest spherical bubble that could fit in that pore as described in the maximal ball
                                                                                      algorithm (Silin & Patzek 2006).

                                                                                      3.2.2. Throats
                                                                                         The edges of the network are what we call throats. A pore throat represents a
                                                                                      connection between two bodies. Pore throats are assigned a radius and a position that
                                                                                      correspond to the position and radius of the constriction that defines the throat. In
                                                                                      the maximal inscribed spheres (MIS) representation of the pore space, the pore throat
                                                                                      constrictions would correspond to local minima for the mapping from the position
                                                                                      along the skeleton to the MIS radii. Throats take the shape of the union of two conical
                                                                                      frustums whose radius at every point along the medial axis of the graph is determined
                                                                                      by linearly interpolating between the throat constriction and the nearest body.

                                                                                      3.2.3. Gas clusters
                                                                                         The pore space will be occupied either by a wetting or a non-wetting phase. An
                                                                                      accurate representation of the interface between the phases is crucial as the shape of
                                                                                      the interfaces determines evolution. The bodies display a spherical symmetry, and the
                                                                                      throats a cylindrical one. In both cases, the problem becomes one-dimensional, and
                                                                                      the state at any point in time of a system of ganglia will entirely be defined by the
                                                                                      positions of the different interfaces along the medial axis of the pore space. If an
                                                                                      interface is in a throat, it will take the form of a spherical cap positioned orthogonally
                                                                                      to the medial axis; if it is in a body, it will take the form of a sphere centred at the
                                                                                      body centre.

                                                                                      4. Algorithmic treatment of the Ostwald ripening mechanism
                                                                                                                    4.1. Simulation framework
                                                                                      For the geometry defined in § 3.2, the Ostwald ripening problem becomes one-
                                                                                      dimensional, since we have a spherical symmetry in the bodies and a cylindrical one
                                                                                      in the throats. The physical laws that describe the system are those we presented
                                                                                      in § 2: Laplace, Henry and Fick’s laws. We decouple the Ostwald ripening mechanism
https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2017.720 Published online by Cambridge University Press




                                                                                      in two processes that operate on different time scales. The slower mechanism is the
                                                                                      diffusion of solute gas between ganglia whose pressures are different. The faster
                                                                                      mechanism is the one by which a change in mass in a gas cluster changes the shape
                                                                                      of the ganglia to ensure pressure is uniform within the cluster.
                                                                                        Accordingly, as illustrated in figure 4, we use a sequential algorithm that
                                                                                      decomposes these two mechanisms. At each time step, we first solve what we
                                                                                      call an internal equilibrium problem for each ganglion. The pressure inside each
                                                                                      ganglion is assumed to be uniform, so solving the internal equilibrium problem
                                                                                      requires finding the position and shape of the ganglion such that the mean curvature
                                                                                      along the unsupported interfaces is identical at every point. We then search in the pore
                                                                                      space for the available diffusion paths between the ganglia. We make the additional
                                                                                      assumption that the diffusion process can be represented by superposition in a set of
                                                                                      diffusive transfers between pairs of ganglia along each diffusion path. This is justified
                                                                                      by the small time steps used for the calculations and the low concentrations of CO2
                                                                                      in brine that are expected in the geologic storage setting (below 5 % mass (Kohl &
                                                                                      Nielsen 1997)). We consequently compute a mass-transfer rate along each diffusion
                                                                                      path. For each time step, the mass transfer by diffusion is calculated by summing the
                                                                                                            Pore-scale modelling of Ostwald ripening                        373

                                                                                                              Initialize mass
                                                                                                              for each body.



                                                                                                               Solve internal              Calculate capillary
                                                                                                            equilibrium problem               pressure for
                                                                                                             for each ganglion.             each ganglion.



                                                                                                              Update mass of
                                                                                                              each ganglion.




                                                                                                                                           Terminate when
                                                                                                                                          mass stops changing.

                                                                                                   F IGURE 4. Flow chart for the sequential simulation algorithm.


                                                                                      contributions from all adjacent ganglia. At the end of the time step, the shape and
                                                                                      the location of the interfaces of the ganglia are adjusted based on the new internal
                                                                                      equilibrium pressure. The algorithm then moves to the next time step.

                                                                                                                  4.2. Internal equilibrium problem
                                                                                      4.2.1. Solution outline
                                                                                         We call internal equilibrium the mechanism by which a cluster of gas modifies
                                                                                      its shape after a change in mass to ensure that the pressure within the gas phase is
                                                                                      the same at every point. Since the pressure in the liquid is assumed to be spatially
                                                                                      uniform, Laplace’s law links the pressure in the gas to the interface radius of the
                                                                                      cluster surface. Given a relationship between mass and volume, (since we are in
                                                                                      reservoir conditions, density dependence on temperature and pressure is small and we
                                                                                      assume it is constant in the numerical applications here. In general this assumption
https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2017.720 Published online by Cambridge University Press




                                                                                      could be relaxed) solving the internal equilibrium problem can be reformulated as
                                                                                      finding the interface radius such that the cluster has a given volume. In the same
                                                                                      way we define pressure for the entire gas phase, we must define an interface radius
                                                                                      that is the same everywhere along the unsupported interfaces (where Laplace’s law
                                                                                      holds).
                                                                                         To simplify the problem, we restrict ourselves to the setting where the cluster of
                                                                                      gas can only span a single body and its neighbouring throats (that have the shape of
                                                                                      converging conical frustums according to the geometry we defined in § 3.2). In the
                                                                                      future, the approach can and should be expanded to include multi-pore body ganglia.
                                                                                      If the volume of gas is smaller than the pore body volume, then the cluster has a
                                                                                      spherical shape and we assume that the cluster centre coincides with the body centre.
                                                                                      If the volume of gas is larger, then the cluster extends into the pore throats and
                                                                                      interacts with the solid matrix: its interface with the liquid in the throats take the
                                                                                      shape of spherical caps. The maximum volume of gas that can be accommodated by
                                                                                      the pore body is determined by the largest interface radius that can exist in all the
                                                                                      throats. At the transition between the body and the throats, there is a discontinuity in
                                                                                      capillary pressure (or equivalently interface radius) since the definition of the interface
                                                                                      374                            J. A. de Chalendar, C. Garing and S. M. Benson

                                                                                      (a)                                                               (b)
                                                                                             200                                                               200


                                                                                               0                                                                 0


                                                                                            −200                                                              −200
                                                                                               400                                                400            400                                         400
                                                                                                       200                             200                              200                            200
                                                                                                                 0           0                                                     0          0
                                                                                                                      −200                                                             −200


                                                                                                   (c) 140


                                                                                                      120



                                                                                                      100
                                                                                                                                     130

                                                                                                       80                            120

                                                                                                                                     110
                                                                                                       60
                                                                                                                                     100

                                                                                                                                      90
                                                                                                       40                               4.0       4.2   4.4    4.6     4.8     5.0


                                                                                                       20
                                                                                                             0        2          4            6         8        10           12       14         16



                                                                                      F IGURE 5. Solving the internal equilibrium problem in a body with five connecting
                                                                                      throats. In (a,b), the cluster is shown in blue, and its volume is the same (Vcl = 1.19 ∗
https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2017.720 Published online by Cambridge University Press




                                                                                      107 µm3 ). In (c), the red dots show the threshold volumes for different cases of the
                                                                                      internal equilibrium problem described in § 4.2. The volumes to the left of the sharp
                                                                                      increase in interface radius correspond to Vcl ∈ [0, (1 − )VB ], where the cluster is in the
                                                                                      green zone in figure 3. In the zoomed portion of the plot, the sharp increase corresponds
                                                                                      to Vcl ∈ [(1 − )VB , VB ], and the portion between the red dots to Vcl ∈ [Vthi , Vthi+1 ], i =
                                                                                      1 . . . n − 1. Some interfaces are in the orange zone in figure 3, and some are in the grey
                                                                                      zone. The volumes to the right of the sharp increase correspond to Vcl ∈ [Vthn , VBmax ]. All
                                                                                      interfaces are in the orange zone in figure 3. (a) Gas cluster – not at internal equilibrium.
                                                                                      (b) Gas cluster – at internal equilibrium. (c) Solution of the internal equilibrium problem
                                                                                      for the full range of available volumes (plot of Rcl = f (Vcl ) for Vcl ∈ [0, VBmax ]).


                                                                                      radius is different with and without interaction with the solid matrix. The capillary
                                                                                      entry pressure of each of the throats is also different.
                                                                                         Figure 5 illustrates the internal equilibrium problem for a pore body neighboured by
                                                                                      five throats. A cluster whose interfaces have different curvatures and that is therefore
                                                                                      not internally equilibrated is shown in figure 5(a), whereas figure 5(b) shows a cluster
                                                                                                             Pore-scale modelling of Ostwald ripening                              375
                                                                                      with the same volume, but now at internal equilibrium. This internal equilibrium
                                                                                      results in a unique relationship between the interface radius and the volume of gas
                                                                                      that can be accommodated that depends on the pore size and connected throats. The
                                                                                      solution to the problem for the full range of available volumes is shown in figure 5(c).
                                                                                      The discontinuity in interface radius (or equivalently capillary pressure) that is shown
                                                                                      in the zoomed portion of figure 5(c) is due to the difference in the relationship
                                                                                      between shape and capillary pressure when the gas phase interacts with the solid
                                                                                      matrix and when it does not.
                                                                                        In the remainder of this section, we first introduce some notation, and then present
                                                                                      a solution for the internal equilibrium problem over the whole range of available
                                                                                      gas volumes. We will show that solving the internal equilibrium problem amounts to
                                                                                      solving for the roots of a polynomial of degree at most three.

                                                                                      4.2.2. Notation
                                                                                         We consider a body neighboured by n throats. We call Vcl the volume of the gas
                                                                                      cluster, VB the volume of the body and VBmax the maximum volume of gas that can
                                                                                      fit into the pore body and its neighbouring throats. (VBmax is defined by the throat
                                                                                      constriction where the interface radius is largest.) In the remainder of the section, we
                                                                                      will use a lowercase r to denote the radius of a geometric element of the pore space
                                                                                      and an uppercase R to denote the radius of a gas–liquid interface. In a conical frustum,
                                                                                      these can be related using Laplace’s law and geometric considerations, as stated in
                                                                                      (2.10) (see figure 2b). We call rthi , i = 1 . . . n the radii of the throats at the constriction
                                                                                            i
                                                                                      and rb,th , i = 1 . . . n the radii of the throats at the junction with the body. The throats
                                                                                      are ordered such that R1b,th > · · · > Rnb,th . We call Vthi , i = 1 . . . n the threshold volume
                                                                                      for throat i, defined as the volume of gas such that the cluster starts invading throat
                                                                                      i. We call Vcon   i
                                                                                                           (Rcl ), i = 1 . . . n the volume of gas in the conical frustum when the
                                                                                      interface radius is Rcl . In the following, we give the form of the solution for the range
                                                                                      of volumes where the gas (i) is a spherical bubble (Vcl ∈ [0, (1 − )VB ]); (ii) starts
                                                                                      interacting with the solid matrix (Vcl ∈ [(1 − )VB , VB ]; (iii) has penetrated some of
                                                                                      the throats (Vcl ∈ [Vthi , Vthi+1 ], i = 1 . . . n − 1) and (iv) has penetrated all of the throats
                                                                                      (Vcl ∈ [Vthn , VBmax ]). The red markers in figure 5(c) show the transition from one volume
                                                                                      interval to the next. (In our numerical applications we take  = 0.01.)
https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2017.720 Published online by Cambridge University Press




                                                                                      4.2.3. Solution for Vcl ∈ [0, (1 − )VB ]
                                                                                        The solution for the internal equilibrium problem is trivial in this case, which
                                                                                      corresponds to a ganglion in the green zone in figure 3. The cluster behaves as if it
                                                                                      were in a bulk liquid and takes the shape of a spherical bubble so that:

                                                                                                                                Vcl = 34 πR3cl .                                  (4.1)

                                                                                      4.2.4. Solution for Vcl ∈ [(1 − )VB , VB ]
                                                                                         In this volume interval we consider that the gas cluster starts to protrude into the
                                                                                      largest pore throat and interact with the solid matrix, which corresponds to the case
                                                                                      where part of the ganglion enters a zone like the one displayed in grey in figure 3. The
                                                                                      capillary pressure defined by the radius of the body is higher than that defined by the
                                                                                      lowest throat capillary entry pressure. (It can be proven that the statement is always
                                                                                      true by using some simple trigonometry and the definitions of the interface radii in
                                                                                      the capillary tube and porous media cases. In our setting, the radii of the body and
                                                                                      throat constriction are given, and throat radius is assumed to vary linearly between the
                                                                                      constriction and the body.) To numerically avoid computations with a discontinuity in
                                                                                      376                  J. A. de Chalendar, C. Garing and S. M. Benson
                                                                                      the capillary pressure variable, we arbitrarily decide that the interface radius and gas
                                                                                      cluster volume are linearly related in this (small) interval:
                                                                                                                                Vcl = ARcl + B,                                  (4.2)
                                                                                      where the coefficients A, B are defined by:
                                                                                                                    Vcl (((1 − )VB )1/3 ) = (1 − )VB ,
                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                 (4.3)
                                                                                                                              Vcl (R1b,th ) = VB .
                                                                                      Given the coefficients A, B, solving for Rcl is trivial.

                                                                                      4.2.5. Solution for Vcl ∈ [Vthi , Vthi+1 ], i = 1 . . . n − 1
                                                                                         In these volume intervals the cluster has penetrated some of the throats. Using the
                                                                                      colours from figure 3, this corresponds to the case where the ganglion has reached
                                                                                      the orange zone in some of its body’s adjacent throats and is in the grey zone for
                                                                                      the other adjacent throats. The throats are ordered such that R1b,th > · · · > Rnb,th (or
                                                                                      equivalently, from lowest to highest capillary entry pressure). For i = 1 . . . n − 1, if
                                                                                      Vcl ∈ [Vthi , Vthi+1 ], then throats 1 . . . i have been invaded by the cluster. The body is
                                                                                      assumed to be entirely filled at this stage, so:
                                                                                                                                          X
                                                                                                                            Vcl = VB +           j
                                                                                                                                                Vcon (Rcl ),                 (4.4)
                                                                                                                                         j<i

                                                                                      where we defined the threshold volumes by Vth1 = VB and
                                                                                                                         X
                                                                                                             Vthi = VB +    j
                                                                                                                           Vcon (Rib,th ) i = 2 . . . n.                         (4.5)
                                                                                                                                j<i

                                                                                      As shown in appendix B, the volume of gas in the conical frustum that represents
                                                                                                 i
                                                                                      throat i, Vcon , can be expressed as a cubic polynomial of the interface radius Rcl and
                                                                                      the expression is valid for Rcl ∈ [Rith , Rib,th ]:
                                                                                                                  π himax
                                                                                                   i
                                                                                                  Vcon (Rcl ) =                  [Rcl cos(θ + φ i ) − rb,th
                                                                                                                                                       i
                                                                                                                                                            ]
                                                                                                                            i
                                                                                                                  3 rthi − rb,th
https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2017.720 Published online by Cambridge University Press




                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                      i
                                                                                                                  × [rb,th    i
                                                                                                                           + rb,th Rcl cos(θ + φ i ) + (Rcl cos(θ + φ i ))2 ].   (4.6)

                                                                                      4.2.6. Solution for Vcl ∈ [Vthn , VBmax ]
                                                                                        In this volume interval, all of the throats are invaded by the cluster, so they all
                                                                                      contribute to total volume:
                                                                                                                                     X
                                                                                                                          Vcl = VB +    i
                                                                                                                                       Vcon (Rcl ).                   (4.7)
                                                                                                                                          i

                                                                                      In figure 3, a cluster occupying body no. 1 has invaded both adjacent throats (zones
                                                                                      in orange).

                                                                                                                        4.3. Diffusive transport
                                                                                      During the mass-transfer step, each cluster exchanges mass with the neighbouring gas
                                                                                      clusters. We first search for the available diffusion paths between the clusters, and then
                                                                                      compute the mass transferred along each path during a time step, as visualized on an
                                                                                      example pore space in figure 6. A rectilinear diffusion regime is used.
                                                                                                           Pore-scale modelling of Ostwald ripening                        377



                                                                                                           150



                                                                                                           100



                                                                                                            50



                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                            150
                                                                                                                  100                                       0
                                                                                                                        50   0             100      50
                                                                                                                                   150


                                                                                      F IGURE 6. Visualization of diffusion paths in an example pore space. Diffusion paths for
                                                                                                           the orange cluster are depicted in orange also.


                                                                                      4.3.1. Diffusion paths
                                                                                         Given a set of ganglia in the pore space, we must find all the available diffusion
                                                                                      paths between them. There can be one, multiple or no diffusion path between two
                                                                                      given clusters. We adapt the classic breadth-first search (Lee 1961) to find all the
                                                                                      diffusion paths between two nodes of the graph. As we search, we record the length
                                                                                      of the path and the minimum area along the path, as these are the length and area
                                                                                      available for diffusion. We also prevent the search algorithm from returning any cyclic
                                                                                      paths (otherwise there could be an infinite number of diffusion paths returned by the
                                                                                      algorithm). Diffusion paths are only calculated between bodies where gas is present,
                                                                                      and do not continue along a trajectory after a ganglion is found. In other words, the
                                                                                      presence of a ganglion is assumed to block diffusion from ‘downstream ganglia’. In
                                                                                      this way, only a limited number of paths need to be considered.
https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2017.720 Published online by Cambridge University Press




                                                                                      4.3.2. Diffusive transport
                                                                                         We use the superposition approach that was introduced earlier to deal with
                                                                                      computing mass-transfer rates for each ganglion. We consider a system with n ganglia.
                                                                                      When searching for diffusion paths in the previous step, ganglion i was found to have
                                                                                      ki neighbours. For each neighbour j, j ∈ [1 . . . ki ], the search algorithm recorded the
                                                                                      minimum area along the diffusion path Aij and the length of the diffusion path xij .
                                                                                      We can calculate the mass transferring from ganglion j to ganglion i by using the
                                                                                      interface radii of the two ganglia Ri and Rj using an explicit time stepping procedure
                                                                                      where Ri and Rj are evaluated at the beginning of the time step, as described in (2.1),
                                                                                      (2.2) and (2.4):
                                                                                                                    ∂mij DAij 2σ 1
                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                         =                 −       .                       (4.8)
                                                                                                                     ∂t     xij H Rj Ri
                                                                                      For each ganglion we sum the contributions from each path in which it appears,
                                                                                      counting mass positively if it is flowing in the ganglion. This gives us the net mass
                                                                                      378                   J. A. de Chalendar, C. Garing and S. M. Benson

                                                                                               Pressure                                         P (MPa)               15
                                                                                               Temperature                                       T (K)              323.6
                                                                                               CO2 density                                     ρ (kg m−3 )          691.5
                                                                                               CO2 /brine interfacial tension                 σ (mN m−1 )           32.6
                                                                                               Diffusivity of CO2 in brine                  D (10−9 m2 s−1 )        3.64
                                                                                               Solubility of CO2 in brine              Cs (kg CO2 /1000 kg brine)    50
                                                                                               Henry’s constant for CO2 in brine            H (MPa m3 kg−1 )         300
                                                                                      TABLE 1. Values for the example simulations are chosen from Chiquet et al. (2007) and
                                                                                      Cadogan et al. (2014). We also use M = 44.0095 g mol−1 and R = 8.314 J K−1 mol−1 .
                                                                                      The value for Henry’s constant is determined using pressure and solubility values and
                                                                                      is plausible according to Li & Nghiem (1986) and Enick & Klara (1990). In particular,
                                                                                      in our setting, the value of the constant in the Krichevsky–Kasarnovsky equation is
                                                                                      exp (ν̄CO
                                                                                             ∞
                                                                                                2
                                                                                                  /RT)P ≈ 1.18 (where ν̄CO
                                                                                                                        ∞
                                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                             = 34 g mol−1 is the partial molar volume of CO2
                                                                                      at infinite dilution) so that a value for Henry’s constant of 300 MPa at (P, T) =
                                                                                      (15 MPa, 323.6 K) is consistent with figure 1 of Enick & Klara (1990). We note that
                                                                                      this corresponds to a constant of 7.57 × 10−5 mol m−3 Pa−1 for the version of Henry’s
                                                                                      law that is written C = HP.


                                                                                      influx ∂mi /∂t to ganglion i, i ∈ [1 . . . n]:
                                                                                                                                    ki
                                                                                                                             ∂mi X     ∂mij
                                                                                                                                 =          .                               (4.9)
                                                                                                                              ∂t   i=1
                                                                                                                                        ∂t

                                                                                      We verify that mass is conserved at each time step by checking that the sum of all
                                                                                      the net influxes is zero at every moment in time.

                                                                                                                          4.4. Time stepping
                                                                                      Some parts of the simulations require shorter time steps than others, so we introduce
                                                                                      an automatic time stepping routine. At initialization of the algorithm, the time step
                                                                                      is set heuristically using the characteristic time for the capillary tube case equations,
                                                                                      as defined in (2.9). If no cluster has disappeared for three consecutive time steps,
                                                                                      the time step is automatically doubled (up to a user-defined maximum). If a cluster
https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2017.720 Published online by Cambridge University Press




                                                                                      disappears during the current time step, the time step is halved until the disappearance
                                                                                      occurs exactly at the end of a time step. The disappearance of a cluster introduces
                                                                                      many changes that would introduce errors otherwise, in particular with regards to the
                                                                                      available diffusion paths, since they are recalculated each time a gas cluster disappears.
                                                                                      Enforcing that clusters can only disappear at the end of a time step is also necessary
                                                                                      to ensure mass is conserved. A user-defined tolerance on mass flow rates is used to
                                                                                      terminate the simulation at what is determined to be the stable equilibrium condition.
                                                                                         The algorithm described in this section is implemented using MATLAB (2014)
                                                                                      with an object-oriented programming framework. The numerical values for physical
                                                                                      parameters provided in table 1 are representative of storage conditions in a deep
                                                                                      saline aquifer.

                                                                                      5. Results
                                                                                                                5.1. Simulating ganglia evolution
                                                                                      We begin with calculations for simple two-pore body problems to illustrate representa-
                                                                                      tive bubble evolution pathways (figure 7). In each case, the pore and pore–throat
                                                                                                                                Pore-scale modelling of Ostwald ripening                       379

                                                                                                            Initial condition                                                   Final condition
                                                                                                                                   20                   1.5
                                                                                      Capillary tube




                                                                                                        20                                              1.0                 20
                                                                                                                                   10
                                                                                                         0                                              0.5                  0
                                                                                                       –20                  100                                            –20                    100
                                                                                                         20 0          50                                                    20 0         50
                                                                                                                  0                                                                   0
                                                                                                            –20                     0          5         0          5           –20

                                                                                                                                   27                    5
                                                                                      Case 2




                                                                                                        20                         26                    4                  20
                                                                                                         0                                                                   0
                                                                                                       –20                  100                                            –20                    100
                                                                                                         20 0          50                                                    20 0         50
                                                                                                                  0                25                    3                            0
                                                                                                            –20                         0      5              0     5           –20

                                                                                                                                   25                   4.0
                                                                                      Case 3




                                                                                                        20                         20                   3.5                 20
                                                                                                         0                                                                   0
                                                                                                       –20                  100                                            –20                    100
                                                                                                         20 0          50                                                    20 0         50
                                                                                                                  0                15                   3.0                           0
                                                                                                            –20                         0      5              0     5           –20

                                                                                                                                   30                   4.0
                                                                                      Case 4




                                                                                                        20                         25                   3.5                 20
                                                                                                         0                                                                   0
                                                                                                       –20                  100                                            –20                    100
                                                                                                         20 0          50                                                    20 0         50
                                                                                                                  0                20                   3.0                           0
                                                                                                            –20                         0      5              0     5           –20



                                                                                      F IGURE 7. Different paths to equilibrium for a simple, symmetric, two-body pore network
                                                                                      model. Each row corresponds to a simulation with a different initial condition: two
                                                                                      spherical bubbles that never interact with the walls (capillary tube case), the ganglia are
                                                                                      both interacting with the solid (case 2), the higher pressure ganglion is interacting with
                                                                                      the solid (case 3), the lower pressure ganglion is interacting with the solid (case 4). For
                                                                                      each simulation, the first column is the initial condition, the second shows the evolution
                                                                                      of interfacial radius for each bubble (µm) as a function of time (105 s), the third shows
                                                                                      the evolution of mass for each bubble (10−11 kg) as a function of time (105 s), and the
https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2017.720 Published online by Cambridge University Press




                                                                                      fourth shows the final condition. In the capillary tube case (first row), we show both the
                                                                                      solution from the algorithmic framework described in § 4 (labelled pnm), and the solution
                                                                                      of the simple two bubbles in a capillary tube system described in (2.6) (labelled cap).


                                                                                      configuration is identical but different initial bubble sizes/shapes lead to different
                                                                                      outcomes. The first row of figure 7 shows the equivalent of Ostwald ripening in a
                                                                                      capillary tube case where the bubbles never interact with the solid matrix. As the
                                                                                      curvature of the smaller bubble decreases, mass is transferred at a progressively faster
                                                                                      rate to the larger bubble. Eventually the smaller bubble disappears and a single-bubble
                                                                                      equilibrium is established. This simple case is also used to validate the numerical
                                                                                      implementation of the algorithmic framework described in § 4 (labelled pnm), by
                                                                                      comparing it to the solution of the simple two bubbles in a capillary tube system
                                                                                      described in (2.6) (labelled cap).
                                                                                         The other cases shown in the last three rows of figure 7 illustrate the stabilizing
                                                                                      effect of the solid matrix on bubble evolution. In the second row of figure 7 we show
                                                                                      two nearly equally sized bubbles converge to a stable equilibrium with a small amount
                                                                                      380                  J. A. de Chalendar, C. Garing and S. M. Benson
                                                                                      of mass transfer from the larger to the smaller bubble. In the third row of figure 7
                                                                                      we see the curvature increasing in both bubbles due to mass transfer from the larger
                                                                                      to the smaller bubble. Finally, the fourth and last row of figure 7 show the curvature
                                                                                      decreasing for both bubbles while mass is being transferred from the smaller to the
                                                                                      larger bubble. None of the behaviours shown in the last three rows of figure 7 would
                                                                                      occur in a bulk solution, and illustrate the complexity of evolution in situations where
                                                                                      the rock walls directly interact with the bubbles.
                                                                                         The overall effect of the interaction with the solid matrix is to stabilize the bubbles.
                                                                                      Capillary pressure changes more quickly with changes in mass in the presence of the
                                                                                      solid (in this conical geometry) as compared to in a bulk liquid where the bubbles
                                                                                      are spheres. Multi-bubble equilibrium is possible with small amounts of mass transfer.
                                                                                      We stress that in more complex geometries however, interaction with the solid matrix
                                                                                      does not guarantee that ripening will lead to stable end points with disconnected gas
                                                                                      ganglia. For example, in a simple two-body network where one body is much larger
                                                                                      than the other, ripening will lead to aggregation into a single larger pore body.
                                                                                         In more complex and realistic pore geometries, evolution can be much harder
                                                                                      to predict. Consider a ganglion growing into its pore’s adjacent converging conical
                                                                                      throats, so that its pressure was lower than that of its neighbours. As the ganglion
                                                                                      grows, its pressure increases, which reduces the driving force for the mechanism, and
                                                                                      the distance between the ganglia also changes, but in a direction that is difficult to
                                                                                      determine qualitatively. As the growing ganglion penetrates farther into the throats
                                                                                      it occupies, its shrinking neighbours recede into their own throats, so that the new
                                                                                      available distance for diffusion will depend on the particular geometry of the pores
                                                                                      the ganglia are centred in, as described by each pore’s individual internal equilibrium
                                                                                      curve.
                                                                                         Next we apply the algorithm to more complex and realistic pore geometries.
                                                                                      Figure 8 shows results from two simulations in a network generated using the
                                                                                      algorithm in appendix B. Parameters for this pore network were extracted from a
                                                                                      Berea sandstone microtomography image (Dong & Blunt 2009). The only difference
                                                                                      between the two simulations is in the initial distribution and size of the bubbles.
                                                                                      The initial capillary pressure distribution of the bubbles has a mean of 2094 Pa and
                                                                                      standard deviation of 60 Pa for figure 8(a), mean of 2770 Pa and standard deviation
                                                                                      of 86 Pa for figure 8(c). These are close to the entry pressure of this sandstone rock
https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2017.720 Published online by Cambridge University Press




                                                                                      (Berea), (the entry pressure can be estimated to be of the order of 1300–2200 Pa
                                                                                      from the pore throat and pore body radius distributions in figure 10(a,b) (using the
                                                                                      interfacial tension in table 1)) as would be expected for residually trapped ganglia
                                                                                      of a non-wetting phase (Garing et al. 2017a). We also note that in both cases, these
                                                                                      pressures are within the measurement errors in Garing et al. (2017a), so that both
                                                                                      initial conditions would experimentally be considered as equilibrium points for the
                                                                                      ripening mechanism.
                                                                                         The differences between these simulations illustrate that without modelling of the
                                                                                      ripening mechanism, the evolution of systems of ganglia that interact with the solid
                                                                                      is very difficult to predict, since the pore structure and initial conditions play a key
                                                                                      role in determining evolution. Although they are very similar, the initial condition in
                                                                                      figure 8(a) leads to a stable equilibrium; whereas the one in figure 8(b) does not: the
                                                                                      cluster represented in orange grows by absorbing the cluster in red, then continues to
                                                                                      grow by absorbing the cluster in green until it can no longer be contained in its pore
                                                                                      body, a Haines jump initiates, and the simulation is stopped.
                                                                                         The simulations in figure 8 also allow us to estimate typical time scales for bubble
                                                                                      evolution. This is of critical importance for determining the stability of residually
                                                                                                              Pore-scale modelling of Ostwald ripening                              381

                                                                                      (a)                                            (b)
                                                                                                                                           33
                                                                                            150
                                                                                                                                           32
                                                                                            100
                                                                                                                                           31
                                                                                             50
                                                                                                                                           30

                                                                                             0
                                                                                             150 100                                       29
                                                                                                       50 0         100   50   0                0   0.5          1.0          1.5   2.0
                                                                                                              150
                                                                                                                                                                t (s)


                                                                                      (c)                                            (d)
                                                                                                                                           35
                                                                                            150
                                                                                                                                           30
                                                                                                                                           25
                                                                                            100
                                                                                                                                           20
                                                                                                                                           15
                                                                                             50
                                                                                                                                           10
                                                                                                                                            5
                                                                                             0
                                                                                             150 100
                                                                                                       50 0         100   50   0            0             0.5           1.0         1.5
                                                                                                              150
                                                                                                                                                                t (s)

                                                                                      F IGURE 8. Impact of initial conditions on evolution of ripening systems. (a) Initial
                                                                                      condition that leads to equilibrium with disconnected ganglia. (b) Evolution of interface
                                                                                      radii for initial conditions in (a). (c) Initial condition that leads to aggregation.
                                                                                      (d) Evolution of interface radii for initial conditions in (b). Simulation stops when the
                                                                                      orange cluster grows to reach a divergent throat and initiates a Haines jump.
https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2017.720 Published online by Cambridge University Press




                                                                                      trapped CO2 and for interpreting pore-and-core-scale experiments for measuring
                                                                                      residually trapped CO2 (Krevor et al. 2015). If local equilibration occurs quickly,
                                                                                      the bubble would be quickly trapped and measurements obtained with short-term
                                                                                      experiments would provide reliable estimates of residual trapping. If equilibration
                                                                                      is slow, estimates from conventional core flooding experiments may not be reliable
                                                                                      because bubble redistribution and potential mobilization may occur on longer time
                                                                                      scales than observed in the typical days-to-week long experiments.
                                                                                         The time scale for equilibration will depend on diffusion paths as well as
                                                                                      thermodynamic properties of the wetting and non-wetting phases (density, interfacial
                                                                                      tension, solubility). They are consistently longer when evolution leads to a stable end
                                                                                      point with disconnected ganglia, since the driving force for equilibration decreases
                                                                                      as the curvature of the two bubbles converge. The average half-life for bubble
                                                                                      equilibration in the simulations in figure 8 is 2.3 days in the stable case (figure 8a,b);
                                                                                      and 1.04 days in the unstable case (figure 8c,d) (the half-life for equilibration is
                                                                                      defined as the time for the capillary pressure of a bubble to change by 1/2 of the
                                                                                      difference between its initial and final values).
                                                                                      382                 J. A. de Chalendar, C. Garing and S. M. Benson
                                                                                         We stress that equilibration times are highly sensitive to the properties of the
                                                                                      fluids, morphology of the pore network and initial conditions. Nevertheless, for rocks
                                                                                      well represented by pore networks with convergent–divergent conical pore throats,
                                                                                      equilibration takes place of the order of weeks to months. In order to understand
                                                                                      the dependence of equilibration times on the value we choose for Henry’s constant,
                                                                                      we run the simulations described in figure 8 with high and low values for Henry’s
                                                                                      constant. For H = 150 MPa, the half-life of the stable simulation is 1.85 days,
                                                                                      compared to 0.94 days for the unstable one. For H = 600 MPa, the half-life of the
                                                                                      stable simulation is 5.6 days, compared to 1.74 days for the unstable one. (Values for
                                                                                      H of 150 MPa, respectively 600 MPa, correspond to a solubility of 2.5 %, respectively
                                                                                      10 %, for scCO2 in brine.)

                                                                                        5.2. Upper bound on stable CO2 saturations in the case of single-pore spanning
                                                                                                                          ganglia
                                                                                      The modelling framework introduced in this paper, and in particular the internal
                                                                                      equilibrium concept, can be used to provide upper bounds on the stable saturations of
                                                                                      residually trapped CO2 . In this section, we do not simulate for evolution of ripening
                                                                                      systems, but rather look for end points for the mechanism, i.e. partitionings of gaseous
                                                                                      CO2 in the different bodies of a network in such a way that all clusters of gas have
                                                                                      the same pore-scale capillary pressure, or equivalently the same interfacial curvature.
                                                                                         Extracting an internal equilibrium curve such as the one in figure 5(c) for each
                                                                                      pore body in a given network provides crucial information about the structure of the
                                                                                      rock represented by that network. In order to further exploit this information, we now
                                                                                      make the following three additional assumptions: (i) ganglia can only be stable if
                                                                                      they interact with the walls (i.e. we restrict ourselves to mechanisms such as the one
                                                                                      labelled case 2 in figure 7); (ii) ganglia span at most one pore; and (iii) bubbles are
                                                                                      always trapped (it is possible that bubble growth will lead to remobilization, but that
                                                                                      is not considered here). The first assumption is motivated by experimental evidence
                                                                                      that the interfacial curvature of residually trapped CO2 is to a first order determined
                                                                                      by the neighbouring pore throats (Andrew et al. 2014a; Garing et al. 2017a), while
                                                                                      the second is dictated by our modelling framework.
https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2017.720 Published online by Cambridge University Press




                                                                                         For each of the 2097 pores in figure 9(a), the internal equilibrium curve for the
                                                                                      corresponding pore body can be used to describe the volume of CO2 that could exist
                                                                                      in that body as a function of pore-scale capillary pressure (or equivalently interface
                                                                                      radius), as described in figure 9(b). At a given pore-scale capillary pressure, repeating
                                                                                      this process for each of the bodies in figure 9(a) (restricting the internal equilibrium
                                                                                      curves to the volume intervals where the ganglia interact with the solid) amounts to
                                                                                      searching the network for the bodies that could accommodate a ganglion with that
                                                                                      capillary pressure, as illustrated in figure 9(c). We record the corresponding total gas
                                                                                      volumes, and plot the resulting gas saturation as a function of pore-scale capillary
                                                                                      pressure in figure 9(d). Since the surface of a stable gas phase must correspond to
                                                                                      constant mean curvature surfaces (even for a disconnected gas phase), this plot finally
                                                                                      yields an upper bound on stable CO2 saturations in this network, under the assumption
                                                                                      that the disconnected gas ganglia span at most one pore. The low saturations observed
                                                                                      on this plot confirm experimental observations that for residual saturations of 10 %–
                                                                                      30 %, the non-wetting phase must take the form of large clusters that occupy multiple
                                                                                      pores (Iglauer et al. 2011; Garing et al. 2017a).
                                                                                                                       Pore-scale modelling of Ostwald ripening                                              383

                                                                                                      (a)

                                                                                                       1000




                                                                                                            500




                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                1000
                                                                                                                                                                        1000
                                                                                                                            500
                                                                                                                                                             500

                                                                                                                                        0    0


                                                                                      (b)                                         (c)                                   (d)
                                                                                            80                                          80                                               0.08
                                                                                            60                                          60                              CO2 saturation   0.06
                                                                                            40                                          40                                               0.04
                                                                                            20                                          20                                               0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                             0    2         4     6     8    10         0        2   4   6    8    10                           2 4 6 8 10 12 14



                                                                                      F IGURE 9. Extracting more information from the internal equilibrium curves.
                                                                                      (a) Visualization for an example stochastic network generated using data from a
                                                                                      network extracted from a Berea sandstone microCT image (Dong & Blunt 2009).
                                                                                      Porosity is 32.7 %. (b) Calculation of volume as a function of interfacial radius using
                                                                                      an internal equilibrium curve (restricted to the volume interval such that the ganglion
                                                                                      interacts with the solid). (c) For a given interfacial radius, calculation of maximum total
https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2017.720 Published online by Cambridge University Press




                                                                                      volume that can be stable in the 2087 pore bodies of the network. (d) Upper bound on
                                                                                      the residual CO2 saturation as a function of capillary pressure in the case where gas
                                                                                      ganglia occupy at most one pore.


                                                                                      6. Discussion
                                                                                        Whereas in the capillary tube setting thermodynamic equilibrium is only reached
                                                                                      when the gas phase aggregates to form a single spherical bubble, in porous media
                                                                                      equilibrium situations with disconnected gas ganglia are theoretically possible. The
                                                                                      major difference between the two cases lies in the relationship between the mass
                                                                                      and capillary pressure variables. Whereas in the capillary tube liquid case, a decrease
                                                                                      in mass results in an increase in capillary pressure, the relationship is much more
                                                                                      complex in the presence of a solid matrix. In rocks, pore-scale capillary pressure
                                                                                      gradients, diffusion paths and pore structure are found to be key in determining
                                                                                      evolution. The results in this paper are applicable to rocks that are well represented
                                                                                      by pore network models: if throats can be represented as converging conical frusta, a
                                                                                      decrease in mass results in a decrease in capillary pressure, which has a stabilizing
                                                                                      384                 J. A. de Chalendar, C. Garing and S. M. Benson
                                                                                      effect. This stabilizing effect as well as the experimental observation that the system
                                                                                      is likely to be initialized with gas clusters that are interacting with the solid matrix
                                                                                      (Garing et al. 2017a) suggest that at a local scale the ripening of disconnected ganglia
                                                                                      is unlikely to cause the bubbles to remobilize as long as the medium is homogeneous.
                                                                                         We then search the pore space for stable equilibrium states to estimate the maximal
                                                                                      saturations that can be residually trapped in a rock. The maximum saturation of
                                                                                      8 % shown in figure 9(c) is quite low, which leads us to conclude that stable end
                                                                                      points with higher saturations of 10 %–30 % necessarily correspond to a cluster size
                                                                                      distribution where some ganglia span multiple pores (such ganglia are frequently
                                                                                      observed in residual trapping experiments (Iglauer et al. 2011; Garing et al. 2017a)).
                                                                                      These plots give yet another indication of the impact of pore structure on the
                                                                                      ripening mechanism, since the range of available capillary pressures that a pore body
                                                                                      can accommodate is determined to a large extent by body-to-throat aspect ratio. We
                                                                                      expect that rocks with higher aspect ratios will have higher maximal CO2 saturations
                                                                                      as defined by figure 9(c) and as such are better able to effectively trap CO2 .
                                                                                         A natural extension of this model would be to include ganglia spanning multiple
                                                                                      pores. In order to do so, we need to determine how much mass is transferred when
                                                                                      a ganglion interacting with a throat shaped like a converging conical frustum grows
                                                                                      in a quasistatic manner until it reaches a portion of a throat shaped like a diverging
                                                                                      conical frustum and initiates the instability referred to as a Haines jump (Haines 1930).
                                                                                      Micromodel experimentation is one path forward to do so. Another limitation of this
                                                                                      work is that when the network becomes sparsely populated, the number of paths
                                                                                      grows exponentially, which makes finding diffusion paths computationally intractable.
                                                                                      Finding an alternative way of modelling diffusion to overcome this computational
                                                                                      barrier for large networks would be another significant step forward.

                                                                                      7. Conclusions and implications for CO2 storage
                                                                                        This paper presents a novel simulation framework to study the effect of pore-scale
                                                                                      Ostwald ripening on the stability of residually trapped scCO2 , a critical question in
                                                                                      the context of the geological storage of carbon dioxide. We use this framework to
                                                                                      demonstrate stability is possible; quantify the importance of pore structure; provide
                                                                                      an upper bound on the stable saturations of trapped scCO2 in the case of single-pore
                                                                                      spanning ganglia; and finally estimate typical evolution times for ripening in a Berea
https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2017.720 Published online by Cambridge University Press




                                                                                      sandstone.
                                                                                        The framework decomposes the Ostwald ripening mechanism into two processes
                                                                                      that operate on different time scales and significantly extends the predictive
                                                                                      capabilities of traditional pore network models where an accurate description of
                                                                                      the mechanism was not previously possible. The methodological approach presented
                                                                                      here provides a foundation to study ripening in porous media that are well represented
                                                                                      by the pore network representation. Results suggest that evolution time scales are
                                                                                      sensitive to both available diffusion paths and the thermodynamic properties of the
                                                                                      wetting and non-wetting phases; and can vary significantly, depending on the type of
                                                                                      rock. In the context of the geological sequestration of carbon dioxide however, even
                                                                                      evolution time scales of several years could be relevant to storage security.

                                                                                      Acknowledgements
                                                                                        Funding for this research is supported by the Department of Energy, Office of
                                                                                      Basic Energy Sciences Energy Frontier Research Center under contract number
                                                                                      DE-AC02-05CH11231 and the Global Climate and Energy Project. We thank the
                                                                                                            Pore-scale modelling of Ostwald ripening                         385
                                                                                      anonymous reviewers for their thorough review and thoughtful comments that
                                                                                      resulted in a significant modification of our initial submission and a much improved
                                                                                      manuscript.

                                                                                      Appendix A. Brief review of previous theoretical frameworks for Ostwald
                                                                                      ripening
                                                                                         Previous work on the Ostwald ripening problem (Greenwood 1956; Lifshitz &
                                                                                      Slyozov 1961; Voorhees 1985; Schmelzer & Schweitzer 1987; Schmelzer et al. 1995)
                                                                                      is commonly based on the Ostwald–Freundlich equation, which uses the following
                                                                                      relation between a liquid and its vapour (Thomson 1872):
                                                                                                                                          2σρg
                                                                                                                       pg (R) = pl +               ,                       (A 1)
                                                                                                                                       (ρl − ρg )R
                                                                                      where pg is the pressure in the gas, pl is the pressure in the liquid, σ is interfacial
                                                                                      tension, ρg , respectively ρl , is the density of the gas phase, respectively of the liquid
                                                                                      phase and R is the radius of the interface. Using the assumptions that (i) the gas is
                                                                                      ideal, (ii) ρl  ρg and (iii) (pg (R) − pl )/pl  1, we can derive the Thomson–Freundlich
                                                                                      (also called Ostwald–Freundlich) equation:
                                                                                                                       pg (R) Rcr                2σ Vatom
                                                                                                                 log         =    ,      Rcr =            ,             (A 2a,b)
                                                                                                                         pl    R                   kB T
                                                                                      where p can be partial pressure, concentration or chemical potential. This equation
                                                                                      highlights the existence of a critical radius for which the system is at equilibrium. It
                                                                                      is derived for a single component system, and using the assumption that the gas is an
                                                                                      ideal gas.
                                                                                         Greenwood (1956) used the Thomson–Freundlich equation as a starting point to
                                                                                      study the growth of solid particles in liquid solutions:
                                                                                                                                 Sa   2Mσ
                                                                                                                            ln      =      ,                               (A 3)
                                                                                                                                 S    RTρa
                                                                                      with S the true solubility, Sa the solubility in contact with a particle of radius a, ρ
                                                                                      density, M molecular weight, σ interfacial tension. Since the difference between S
https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2017.720 Published online by Cambridge University Press




                                                                                      and Sa is small, the difference between the solubilities in contact with two different
                                                                                      particles of radius a1 and a2 is then written as:
                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                              2Mσ S 1        1
                                                                                                                  Sa1 − Sa2 =             −      .                      (A 4)
                                                                                                                               RTρ     a1 a2
                                                                                      Using Fick’s law, Greenwood (1956) then derives the following equation for the
                                                                                      evolution of the radius of a particle in a system of n particles:
                                                                                                                                   n             
                                                                                                                 2 da      2Mσ S X A         1    1
                                                                                                            4πρa      =D                       −       ,       (A 5)
                                                                                                                   dt       RTρ i=1 x        ai a

                                                                                      with (A/x) the effective area to length ratio of the diffusion path between two particles.
                                                                                      Using a spherical diffusion regime, conservation of mass and assuming that the grains
                                                                                      are far away from each other leads to equation (7) in Greenwood (1956):
                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                    da        2Mσ       1     1
                                                                                                                        = DS               −      ,                      (A 6)
                                                                                                                     dt      RTρ 2 a am a
                                                                                      386                 J. A. de Chalendar, C. Garing and S. M. Benson
                                                                                      with am the arithmetic  mean radius of the system of n particles. We note that this
                                                                                      corresponds to ni=1 (A/x)i = 4πa and that this is valid in a system where the particles
                                                                                                      P
                                                                                      are highly dispersed.
                                                                                        A major breakthrough in the study of the Ostwald ripening phenomenon was the
                                                                                      seminal paper by Lifshitz & Slyozov (1961), who consider a slightly supersaturated
                                                                                      solution, and were able to make quantitative predictions on the asymptotic behaviour
                                                                                      of coarsening systems without explicitly solving the relevant equations. They consider
                                                                                      diffusion currents between the grains and the solution, and start from the equation:
                                                                                                                               α         2σ νC∞
                                                                                                                   CR = C∞ +     , α=           ,                         (A 7)
                                                                                                                               R           kT
                                                                                      where CR is the concentration in contact with a particle of radius R, C∞ is the
                                                                                      concentration of the saturated solution and ν is the atomic volume of the solute.
                                                                                      Equation (A 7) is used with Fick’s law and conservation of mass (assuming that no
                                                                                      new particles appear) to derive a governing equation for the particle radius distribution
                                                                                      function f . At long times, it is then shown that the distribution function f verifies
                                                                                      an ordinary differential equation, which can be solved to make predictions on the
                                                                                      long-term evolution of the mean and critical radii. We note that the Lifschitz–Slyozov,
                                                                                      or Lifschitz–Slyozov–Wagner (LSW) theory, like Greenwood (1956), considers that
                                                                                      grains are far enough that a spherical diffusion regime can be considered, and
                                                                                      establishes asymptotic results on the evolution of the radius distribution function.
                                                                                      A review of this classic theory and of subsequent results is given in Voorhees
                                                                                      (1985). Some attempts were later made to extend this theory to porous media, e.g. in
                                                                                      Schmelzer et al. (1995), which builds off the same equations as in the LSW theory
                                                                                      but then assumes growth stops or is strongly inhibited as soon as the growing grains
                                                                                      start interacting with the solid matrix.

                                                                                      Appendix B. Generation of stochastic network models
                                                                                         In this section we present an algorithm to generate stochastic network models that
                                                                                      are statistically representative of real rocks. As in Idowu (2009), we target statistical
                                                                                      properties that are commonly available from microCT imaging. In particular, we
                                                                                      seek to generate networks where the probability distribution functions (p.d.f.) for
                                                                                      certain macroscopic parameters match those of a network derived from a real rock:
                                                                                      (i) body radius, (ii) throat radius, (iii) coordination number and (iv) throat length. The
https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2017.720 Published online by Cambridge University Press




                                                                                      network model shown in figure 9 was generated using the algorithm we developed.
                                                                                      The network consists in 2026 bodies linked by 4213 throats, for a total porosity of
                                                                                      32.7 %. It was generated using code made available online (de Chalendar 2016b)
                                                                                      and data from a Berea sandstone network extracted using Dong & Blunt (2009). In
                                                                                      figure 10, we show the target and generated statistical properties for the network in
                                                                                      figure 9.

                                                                                                                        B.1. Algorithm
                                                                                      The main steps of the algorithm we have developed to generate stochastic network
                                                                                      models are summarized in the following.
                                                                                       (i) Define a bounding box for the pore space.
                                                                                       (ii) Generate bodies. Body centres are generated using random sampling in the
                                                                                            bounding box. Body radii are drawn from the body radius p.d.f. As each new
                                                                                            body is generated, its distance to all the other bodies is stored (if it is too
                                                                                            close to one of the previous bodies, the current one is discarded). Bodies are
                                                                                            generated until a target porosity is reached.
                                                                                                                                               Pore-scale modelling of Ostwald ripening                                            387

                                                                                      (a) 0.06                                                                   Generated
                                                                                                                                                                                (b) 0.08
                                                                                                                     0.05                                        Original
                                                                                              Probability density


                                                                                                                                                                                       0.06
                                                                                                                     0.04

                                                                                                                     0.03                                                              0.04

                                                                                                                     0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                       0.02
                                                                                                                     0.01

                                                                                                                       0                                                                 0
                                                                                                                             10         20         30     40       50                             10        20           30        40
                                                                                                                                  Pore body radius (                                              Pore throat radius (

                                                                                       (c) 0.010                                                                                (d)     2.0
                                                                                      Probability density




                                                                                                                    0.008
                                                                                                                                                                                        1.5
                                                                                                                    0.006
                                                                                                                                                                                        1.0
                                                                                                                    0.004

                                                                                                                                                                                        0.5
                                                                                                                    0.002

                                                                                                                       0                                                                 0
                                                                                                                            50    100        150    200   250     300                         2        4    6      8          10    12
                                                                                                                                   Throat length (                                                 Coordination number

                                                                                                                                                    (e)    102




                                                                                                                                                           101
https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2017.720 Published online by Cambridge University Press




                                                                                                                                                           100                   101               102
                                                                                                                                                                        Pore body radius (

                                                                                      F IGURE 10. Statistical properties of the stochastically generated network in figure 9.
                                                                                      (a) Pore body radius (µm). (b) Pore throat radius (µm). (c) Throat length (µm).
                                                                                      (d) Coordination number. (e) Correlation between radius of body and average radius for
                                                                                      the connecting throats.


                                                                                       (iii) Draw random samples from the coordination number p.d.f. until we have as
                                                                                             many coordination numbers as bodies.
                                                                                       (iv) Choose a weight for each body. For example, we use the distance to the nth
                                                                                             closest neighbouring body, where n is the highest coordination number we drew
                                                                                             (another possible choice is given in Idowu & Blunt 2010).
                                                                                      388                  J. A. de Chalendar, C. Garing and S. M. Benson
                                                                                         (v) Assign coordination numbers to the bodies based on the body weights.
                                                                                        (vi) Generate connections. Continually select bodies at random in those that have
                                                                                             connections left to make. Draw a target throat length from the throat length p.d.f.
                                                                                             Use the distance matrix created in step 2 to find the connection that corresponds
                                                                                             to the closest throat length in the connections that have not been made yet.
                                                                                       (vii) Draw random sample from the throat radius p.d.f. until we have as many radii
                                                                                             as connections.
                                                                                      (viii) Choose a weight for each connection. We use the smallest of the radii of the
                                                                                             bodies that are connected by each throat.
                                                                                        (ix) Assign radii to the throats based on the throat weights. We enforce that all
                                                                                             throats must have a smaller radius than the bodies it connects.

                                                                                                                  i (R )
                                                                                      Appendix C. Expression for Vcon cl
                                                                                         We redefine some variables for the purpose of this derivation. We consider an
                                                                                      interface that is in throat i, i = 1 . . . n. We call Ri the radius of the interface and ri
                                                                                      the radius of the conical frustum at the location of the interface; himax the length of
                                                                                      throat i; and hi the position of the interface in throat i with hi ∈ [0, himax ].
                                                                                                                                         i
                                                                                         The volume of gas in the conical frustum Vcon      can be expressed as (we neglect the
                                                                                      volume of the spherical cap):
                                                                                                                       i        π i i 2       i           2
                                                                                                                      Vcon =      h [rb,th + rb,th ri + ri ].                    (C 1)
                                                                                                                                3
                                                                                      The relation between tube radius and interface radius is given by
                                                                                                                                   ri
                                                                                                                     Ri =                   ,    i = 1 . . . n.                  (C 2)
                                                                                                                              cos(θ + φ i )
                                                                                      We call Rcl the equilibrium interface radius. We have ∀i = 1 . . . n, Rcl = Ri so
                                                                                                                   ∀i = 1 . . . n,     ri = Rcl cos(θ + φ i ).                   (C 3)
                                                                                      We also write the relation between position and tube radius using linear interpolation:
https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2017.720 Published online by Cambridge University Press




                                                                                                                                   hi
                                                                                                              ri = (rthi − rb,th
                                                                                                                            i
                                                                                                                                 ) i + rb,th
                                                                                                                                        i
                                                                                                                                             ,         i = 1 . . . n,            (C 4)
                                                                                                                                  hmax
                                                                                      so that we can also express hi as a function of Rcl
                                                                                                                                             Rcl cos(θ + φ i ) − rb,th
                                                                                                                                                                  i
                                                                                                           ∀i = 1 . . . n,      hi = himax                             .         (C 5)
                                                                                                                                                            i
                                                                                                                                                    rthi − rb,th
                                                                                        Finally, we can express the volume of the ganglion that is in the conical frustum
                                                                                      as a function of the equilibrium interface radius:
                                                                                                                  π himax
                                                                                                   i
                                                                                                  Vcon (Rcl ) =                  [Rcl cos(θ + φ i ) − rb,th
                                                                                                                                                       i
                                                                                                                                                            ]
                                                                                                                            i
                                                                                                                  3 rthi − rb,th
                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                      i
                                                                                                                  × [rb,th    i
                                                                                                                           + rb,th Rcl cos(θ + φ i ) + (Rcl cos(θ + φ i ))2 ].   (C 6)
                                                                                      This last relation gives the volume of the ganglion as a cubic polynomial of the
                                                                                      equilibrium interface radius. There are three possible solutions to this equation.
                                                                                                               Pore-scale modelling of Ostwald ripening                                 389
                                                                                      In practice, we find there is only one solution in the interval [Rmin , Rmax ], where Rmin
                                                                                      is the interface radius defined by the limiting throat and Rmax is the radius of the
                                                                                      body rB . Note that to find the maximum available volume VBmax we do not need to
                                                                                      solve an internal equilibrium problem. Since we know that for this volume the radius
                                                                                      of the interface is the one defined by the limiting throat, we can directly calculate
                                                                                      the volume VBmax using (C 6).


                                                                                                                                 REFERENCES

                                                                                      A NDREW, M., B IJELJIC , B. & B LUNT, M. J. 2014a Pore-by-pore capillary pressure measurements
                                                                                              using x-ray microtomography at reservoir conditions: curvature, snap-off, and remobilization
                                                                                              of residual co2. Water Resour. Res. 50 (11), 8760–8774.
                                                                                      A NDREW, M., B IJELJIC , B. & B LUNT, M. J. 2014b Pore-scale imaging of trapped supercritical
                                                                                              carbon dioxide in sandstones and carbonates. Intl J. Greenh. Gas Control 22, 1–14.
                                                                                      A RMSTRONG , R. T., P ORTER , M. L. & W ILDENSCHILD , D. 2012 Linking pore-scale interfacial
                                                                                              curvature to column-scale capillary pressure. Adv. Water Resour. 46 (0), 55–62.
                                                                                      A RNS , J.-Y., ROBINS , V., S HEPPARD , A. P., S OK , R. M., P INCZEWSKI , W. V. & K NACKSTEDT,
                                                                                              M. A. 2004 Effect of network topology on relative permeability. Trans. Porous Med. 55 (1),
                                                                                              21–46.
                                                                                      BACHU , S. 2008 Co2 storage in geological media: role, means, status and barriers to deployment.
                                                                                              Prog. Energy Combust. Sci. 34 (2), 254–273.
                                                                                      BAKKE , S. & Ø REN , P.-E. 1997 3-d pore-scale modelling of sandstones and flow simulations in the
                                                                                              pore networks. SPE J. 2 (02), 136–149.
                                                                                      B EAR , J. 1972 Dynamics of Fluids in Porous Media. Elsevier.
                                                                                      B ENSON , S. M. & C OLE , D. R. 2008 Co2 sequestration in deep sedimentary formations. Elements
                                                                                              4 (5), 325–331.
                                                                                      B LUNT, M. J. 2001 Flow in porous media – pore-network models and multiphase flow. Curr. Opin.
                                                                                              Colloid Interface Sci. 6 (3), 197–207.
                                                                                      B LUNT, M. J., B IJELJIC , B., D ONG , H., G HARBI , O., I GLAUER , S., M OSTAGHIMI , P., PALUSZNY,
                                                                                              A. & P ENTLAND , C. 2013 Pore-scale imaging and modelling. Adv. Water Resour. 51, 197–216.
                                                                                      C ADOGAN , S. P., M AITLAND , G. C. & T RUSLER , J. M. 2014 Diffusion coefficients of co2 and n2
                                                                                              in water at temperatures between 298.15 k and 423.15 k at pressures up to 45 mpa. J. Chem.
                                                                                              Engng Data 59 (2), 519–525.
                                                                                      DE C HALENDAR , J. A. 2016a Impact of Ostwald ripening on residually trapped carbon dioxide.
                                                                                              Master’s thesis, Stanford University.
https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2017.720 Published online by Cambridge University Press




                                                                                      DE C HALENDAR , J. A. 2016b pnm-generation. GitHub repository. https://github.com/jdechalendar/
                                                                                              pnm-generation.
                                                                                      DE C HALENDAR , J. A., G ARING , C. & B ENSON , S. M. 2017 Pore-scale considerations on Ostwald
                                                                                              ripening in rocks. Energy Proc. 114C, 484–489.
                                                                                      C HAUDHARY, K., BAYANI C ARDENAS , M., W OLFE , W. W., M AISANO , J. A., K ETCHAM , R. A. &
                                                                                              B ENNETT, P. C. 2013 Pore-scale trapping of supercritical co2 and the role of grain wettability
                                                                                              and shape. Geophys. Res. Lett. 40 (15), 3878–3882.
                                                                                      C HEN , S. & D OOLEN , G. D. 1998 Lattice Boltzmann method for fluid flows. Annu. Rev. Fluid
                                                                                              Mech. 30 (1), 329–364.
                                                                                      C HIQUET, P., DARIDON , J.-L., B ROSETA , D. & T HIBEAU , S. 2007 Co2/water interfacial tensions
                                                                                              under pressure and temperature conditions of co2 geological storage. Energy Convers. Manage.
                                                                                              48 (3), 736–744.
                                                                                      C NUDDE , V. & B OONE , M. N. 2013 High-resolution x-ray computed tomography in geosciences: a
                                                                                              review of the current technology and applications. Earth-Sci. Rev. 123, 1–17.
                                                                                      D IAS , M. M. & PAYATAKES , A. C. 1986a Network models for two-phase flow in porous media.
                                                                                              Part 1. Immiscible microdisplacement of non-wetting fluids. J. Fluid Mech. 164, 305–336.
                                                                                      D IAS , M. M. & PAYATAKES , A. C. 1986b Network models for two-phase flow in porous media.
                                                                                              Part 2. Motion of oil ganglia. J. Fluid Mech. 164, 337–358.
                                                                                      390                    J. A. de Chalendar, C. Garing and S. M. Benson
                                                                                      D OMINGUEZ , A., B ORIES , S. & P RAT, M. 2000 Gas cluster growth by solute diffusion in porous
                                                                                              media. Experiments and automaton simulation on pore network. Intl J. Multiphase Flow 26
                                                                                             (12), 1951–1979.
                                                                                      D ONG , H. & B LUNT, M. J. 2009 Pore-network extraction from micro-computerized-tomography
                                                                                              images. Phys. Rev. E 80 (3), 036307.
                                                                                      D ULLIEN , F. A. L. 2012 Porous Media: Fluid Transport and Pore Structure. Academic.
                                                                                      E NICK , R. M. & K LARA , S. M. 1990 Co2 solubility in water and brine under reservoir conditions.
                                                                                             Chem. Engng Commun. 90 (1), 23–33.
                                                                                      E PSTEIN , P. S. & P LESSET, M. S. 1950 On the stability of gas bubbles in liquid–gas solutions.
                                                                                             J. Chem. Phys. 18 (11), 1505–1509.
                                                                                      E STRADA -A LEXANDERS , A. F. & T RUSLER , J. P. M. 1998 Speed of sound in carbon dioxide at
                                                                                              temperatures between (220 and 450) k and pressures up to 14 mpa. J. Chem. Thermodyn. 30
                                                                                             (12), 1589–1601.
                                                                                      FATT, I. 1956 The network model of porous media. Trans. Soc. Petrol. Engrs AIME 207, 144–181.
                                                                                      F ISCHER , U. & C ELIA , M. A. 1999 Prediction of relative and absolute permeabilities for gas and
                                                                                             water from soil water retention curves using a pore-scale network model. Water Resour. Res.
                                                                                              35 (4), 1089–1100.
                                                                                      G ARING , C., DE C HALENDAR , J. A., VOLTOLINI , M., A JO -F RANKLIN , J. B. & B ENSON , S. M.
                                                                                              2017a Pore-scale capillary pressure analysis using multi-scale x-ray micromotography. Adv.
                                                                                             Water Res. 104, 223–241.
                                                                                      G ARING , C., DE C HALENDAR , J. A., VOLTOLINI , M., A JO -F RANKLIN , J. B. & B ENSON , S. M.
                                                                                              2017b Pore-scale evolution of trapped co2 at early stages following imbibition using micro-ct
                                                                                              imaging. Energy Proc. 114C, 4871–4877.
                                                                                      G EISTLINGER , H., M OHAMMADIAN , S., S CHLUETER , S. & VOGEL , H.-J. 2014 Quantification of
                                                                                              capillary trapping of gas clusters using x-ray microtomography. Water Resour. Res. 50 (5),
                                                                                             4514–4529.
                                                                                      G EORGIADIS , A., B ERG , S., M AKURAT, A., M AITLAND , G. & OTT, H. 2013 Pore-scale micro-
                                                                                              computed-tomography imaging: nonwetting-phase cluster-size distribution during drainage and
                                                                                              imbibition. Phys. Rev. E 88 (3), 033002.
                                                                                      G OLDOBIN , D. S. & B RILLIANTOV, N. V. 2011 Diffusive counter dispersion of mass in bubbly
                                                                                              media. Phys. Rev. E 84 (5), 056328.
                                                                                      G REENWOOD , G. W. 1956 The growth of dispersed precipitates in solutions. Acta Metall. 4, 243–248.
                                                                                      H AINES , W. B. 1930 Studies in the physical properties of soil. V. The hysteresis effect in capillary
                                                                                              properties, and the modes of moisture distribution associated therewith. J. Agr. Sci 20 (01),
                                                                                              97–116.
                                                                                      H IRT, C. W. & N ICHOLS , B. D. 1981 Volume of fluid (vof) method for the dynamics of free
https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2017.720 Published online by Cambridge University Press




                                                                                              boundaries. J. Comput. Phys. 39 (1), 201–225.
                                                                                      I DOWU , N. A. 2009 Pore-scale modeling: stochastic network generation and modeling of rate effects
                                                                                              in water flooding. A dissertation submitted in fulfillments of the requirements for the degree
                                                                                              of philosophy of the Imperial College London.
                                                                                      I DOWU , N. A. & B LUNT, M. J. 2010 Pore-scale modelling of rate effects in waterflooding. Trans.
                                                                                             Porous Med. 83 (1), 151–169.
                                                                                      I GLAUER , S., PALUSZNY, A., P ENTLAND , C. H. & B LUNT, M. J. 2011 Residual co2 imaged with
                                                                                             x-ray micro-tomography. Geophys. Res. Lett. 38 (21), L21403.
                                                                                      J OEKAR -N IASAR , V., H ASSANIZADEH , S. M. & DAHLE , H. K. 2010 Non-equilibrium effects in
                                                                                              capillarity and interfacial area in two-phase flow: dynamic pore-network modelling. J. Fluid
                                                                                             Mech. 655, 38–71.
                                                                                      J OEKAR -N IASAR , V., H ASSANIZADEH , S. M. & L EIJNSE , A. 2008 Insights into the relationships
                                                                                              among capillary pressure, saturation, interfacial area and relative permeability using pore-
                                                                                              network modeling. Trans. Porous Med. 74 (2), 201–219.
                                                                                      K OHL , A. L. & N IELSEN , R. 1997 Gas Purification. Gulf Professional Publishing.
                                                                                      K REVOR , S., B LUNT, M. J., B ENSON , S. M., P ENTLAND , C. H., R EYNOLDS , C., A L -M ENHALI ,
                                                                                              A. & N IU , B. 2015 Capillary trapping for geologic carbon dioxide storage – from pore scale
                                                                                              physics to field scale implications. Intl J. Greenh. Gas Control 40, 221–237.
                                                                                                               Pore-scale modelling of Ostwald ripening                                    391
                                                                                      L EE , C. Y. 1961 An algorithm for path connections and its applications. IRE Trans. Electron.
                                                                                               Computers EC-10 (3), 346–365.
                                                                                      L I , X. & Y ORTSOS , Y. C. 1995 Theory of multiple bubble growth in porous media by solute
                                                                                               diffusion. Chem. Engng Sci. 50 (8), 1247–1271.
                                                                                      L I , Y.-K. & N GHIEM , L. X. 1986 Phase equilibria of oil, gas and water/brine mixtures from a cubic
                                                                                               equation of state and Henry’s law. Can. J. Chem. Engng 64 (3), 486–496.
                                                                                      L IFSHITZ , I. M. & S LYOZOV, V. V. 1961 The kinetics of precipitation from supersaturated solid
                                                                                               solutions. J. Phys. Chem. Solids 19 (1–2), 35–50.
                                                                                      L INDQUIST, W. B., L EE , S.-M., C OKER , D. A., J ONES , K. W. & S PANNE , P. 1996 Medial axis
                                                                                               analysis of void structure in three-dimensional tomographic images of porous media. J. Geophys.
                                                                                               Res.-Sol. Earth 101 (B4), 8297–8310.
                                                                                      L INSTROM , P. J. & M ALLARD , W. G. ed. 2005 NIST chemistry webbook, NIST standard reference
                                                                                               database number 69. Gaithersburg MD, 20899: National Institute of Standards and Technology.
                                                                                      MATLAB 2014 Version 8.3.0 (R2014a). Natick, Massachusetts: The MathWorks Inc.
                                                                                      M C C LURE , J. E., B ERRILL , M. A., G RAY, W. G. & M ILLER , C. T. 2016a Influence of phase
                                                                                               connectivity on the relationship among capillary pressure, fluid saturation, and interfacial area
                                                                                               in two-fluid-phase porous medium systems. Phys. Rev. E 94 (3), 033102.
                                                                                      M C C LURE , J. E., B ERRILL , M. A., G RAY, W. G. & M ILLER , C. T. 2016b Tracking interface and
                                                                                               common curve dynamics for two-fluid flow in porous media. J. Fluid Mech. 796, 211–232.
                                                                                      M EAKIN , P. & TARTAKOVSKY, A. M. 2009 Modeling and simulation of pore-scale multiphase fluid
                                                                                               flow and reactive transport in fractured and porous media. Rev. Geophys. 47, RG3002.
                                                                                      M ÖLLER , J., JACOB , K. I. & S CHMELZER , J. 1998 Ostwald ripening in porous viscoelastic materials.
                                                                                               J. Phys. Chem. Solids 59 (6), 1097–1103.
                                                                                      Ø REN , P.-E. & BAKKE , S. 2002 Process based reconstruction of sandstones and prediction of transport
                                                                                               properties. Trans. Porous Med. 46 (2–3), 311–343.
                                                                                      Ø REN , P.-E., BAKKE , S., A RNTZEN , O. J. et al. 1998 Extending predictive capabilities to network
                                                                                               models. SPE J. 3 (04), 324–336.
                                                                                      O SHER , S. & S ETHIAN , J. A. 1988 Fronts propagating with curvature-dependent speed: algorithms
                                                                                               based on Hamilton–Jacobi formulations. J. Comput. Phys. 79 (1), 12–49.
                                                                                      P EREIRA , G. G., P INCZEWSKI , W. V., C HAN , D. Y. C., PATERSON , L. & Ø REN , P. E. 1996
                                                                                               Pore-scale network model for drainage-dominated three-phase flow in porous media. Trans.
                                                                                               Porous Med. 24 (2), 167–201.
                                                                                      P RODANOVI Ć , M. & B RYANT, S. L. 2006 A level set method for determining critical curvatures for
                                                                                               drainage and imbibition. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 304 (2), 442–458.
                                                                                      R AEINI , A. Q., B LUNT, M. J. & B IJELJIC , B. 2012 Modelling two-phase flow in porous media at
                                                                                               the pore scale using the volume-of-fluid method. J. Comput. Phys. 231 (17), 5653–5668.
https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2017.720 Published online by Cambridge University Press




                                                                                      R AHMAN , T., L EBEDEV, M., BARIFCANI , A. & I GLAUER , S. 2016 Residual trapping of supercritical
                                                                                               co2 in oil-wet sandstone. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 469, 63–68.
                                                                                      S CHLÜTER , S., B ERG , S., L I , T., VOGEL , H.-J. & W ILDENSCHILD , D. 2017 Time scales of relaxation
                                                                                               dynamics during transient conditions in two-phase flow. Water Resour. Res 53, 4709–4724.
                                                                                      S CHLÜTER , S., S HEPPARD , A., B ROWN , K. & W ILDENSCHILD , D. 2014 Image processing of
                                                                                               multiphase images obtained via x-ray microtomography: a review. Water Resour. Res. 50
                                                                                               (4), 3615–3639.
                                                                                      S CHMELZER , J., M ÖLLER , J. et al. 1995 Ostwald ripening in porous materials: the case of arbitrary
                                                                                               pore size distributions. J. Phys. Chem. Solids 56 (8), 1013–1022.
                                                                                      S CHMELZER , J. & S CHWEITZER , F. 1987 Ostwald ripening of bubbles in liquid–gas solutions. J. Non-
                                                                                               Equilib. Thermodyn. 12 (3), 255–270.
                                                                                      S ILIN , D. & PATZEK , T. 2006 Pore space morphology analysis using maximal inscribed spheres.
                                                                                               Physica A 371 (2), 336–360.
                                                                                      S OK , R. M., K NACKSTEDT, M. A., S HEPPARD , A. P., P INCZEWSKI , W. V., L INDQUIST, W. B.,
                                                                                               V ENKATARANGAN , A. & PATERSON , L. 2002 Direct and stochastic generation of network
                                                                                               models from tomographic images; effect of topology on residual saturations. Trans. Porous
                                                                                               Med. 46 (2–3), 345–372.
                                                                                      392                  J. A. de Chalendar, C. Garing and S. M. Benson
                                                                                      S USSMAN , M., S MEREKA , P. & O SHER , S. 1994 A level set approach for computing solutions to
                                                                                            incompressible two-phase flow. J. Comput. Phys. 114 (1), 146–159.
                                                                                      TANINO , Y. & B LUNT, M. J. 2012 Capillary trapping in sandstones and carbonates: dependence on
                                                                                            pore structure. Water Resour. Res. 48 (8).
                                                                                      T HOMSON , W. 1872 4. on the equilibrium of vapour at a curved surface of liquid. Proc. R. Soc.
                                                                                            Edin. 7, 63–68.
                                                                                      VALVATNE , P. H. & B LUNT, M. J. 2003 Predictive pore-scale network modeling. In SPE Annu.
                                                                                            Tech. Conf. Exhib. Denver, CO, 5–8 October 2003, Paper SPE-84550-MS, pp. 1–12. Society
                                                                                            of Petroleum Engineers.
                                                                                      VOORHEES , P. W. 1985 The theory of Ostwald ripening. J. Stat. Phys. 38 (1–2), 231–252.
https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2017.720 Published online by Cambridge University Press
