Transport in Porous Media (2022) 141:231–253
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11242-021-01722-y




Long‑Term Redistribution of Residual Gas Due
to Non‑convective Transport in the Aqueous Phase

Yaxin Li1     · Franklin M. Orr Jr.1 · Sally M. Benson1

Received: 23 June 2021 / Accepted: 19 November 2021 / Published online: 26 November 2021
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature B.V. 2021


Abstract
Geological CO2 sequestration is an effective approach to mitigate greenhouse gas emis-
sions by permanently trapping CO2 in the subsurface. A large portion of injected CO2 is
trapped by capillary forces in pores and eventually dissolves into the reservoir brine due
to convective mixing to achieve permanent entrapment. In regions where convective mix-
ing is slow, non-convective transport can play an important role in redistributing resid-
ually trapped CO2 , but the mechanisms and timescales for redistribution have yet to be
explored thoroughly. In previous work, we have shown that capillary pressure difference
among residually trapped gas ganglia can induce Ostwald ripening, thereby redistribut-
ing the separate-phase gas through diffusion despite the gas phase remaining trapped over
the entire course of equilibration. In this study, we show from a thermodynamic point of
view that other natural gradients in geologic formations— hydrostatic pressure, geothermal
gradients and capillary heterogeneity—can also redistribute CO2 by non-convective trans-
port. Mechanisms for resulting non-convective transport include molecular diffusion, the
sedimentation effect and potentially the Soret effect. Results show that hydrostatic pressure
dominates redistribution such that the separate-phase gas is transported upward through
molecular diffusion and accumulates under the seal at the steady state. A typical timescale
for gas phase redistribution is 105 years/m; for a 100-m-thick formation, redistribution is
complete after ∼ 107 years. Although non-convective transport is an extremely slow pro-
cess, it causes local accumulation of the gas phase and in some settings may remobilize the
trapped gas phase.

Keywords Residual trapping · Thermodynamic equilibrium · Non-convective transport ·
CO2 sequestration


1 Introduction

In a geological formation where a continuous gas phase migrates due to buoyancy forces,
formation brine imbibes into the trailing edge of the gas plume. During imbibition, the
gas phase at the trailing edge becomes disconnected into many individual gas ganglia that


* Yaxin Li
  yaxinl@stanford.edu
1
    Department of Energy Resources Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA


                                                                                             13
                                                                                     Vol.:(0123456789)
232                                                                                  Y. Li et al.


are trapped in the pore spaces. This trapping mechanism is referred to as residual trap-
ping (Roof 1970; Kumar et al. 2004; Mo et al. 2005; Hesse et al. 2006; Juanes et al. 2006;
Suekane et al. 2008; Iglauer et al. 2011; Krevor et al. 2012). Residually trapped gas widely
exists along the migration path of the gas phase in many natural geological formations,
such as oil and gas reservoirs, methane-rich undersea sediments and saline formations for
geological storage of CO2 (Claypool and Kaplan 1974; Chatzis et al. 1983; Kumar et al.
2005; Lei and Seol 2020).
    In the context of geological CO2 storage, the long-term entrapment of residually trapped
gas enhances the security of CO2 storage, since residually trapped CO2 can immobilize
a large portion of injected CO2Pentland et al. (2011); Burnside and Naylor (2014). One
theory for the long-term fate of residually trapped CO2 is that the separate-phase CO2 will
eventually dissolve into the formation brine, a process that is accelerated by convective
mixing Bourg et al. (2015); Jiang and Tsuji (2015). Convective mixing originates from the
fact that the aqueous solution of CO2 near the top of the aquifer is slightly denser than the
“fresh” brine underneathTeng et al. (1997). This density contrast drives the CO2 solution to
sink and brings more “fresh” brine into contact with separate-phase CO2 , thereby enhanc-
ing CO2 dissolution Ennis-King et al. (2005); Riaz et al. (2006); Hassanzadeh et al. (2007);
Neufeld et al. (2010). Studies have shown that the timescale for onset of convective mix-
ing strongly depends on Rayleigh number, a combination of reservoir conditions and fluid
properties Ennis-King et al. (2003). For reservoirs with low permeability ( k < 10 mD), dis-
solution of residually trapped CO2 is likely to be a slow process, occurring in thousands of
years or longer after injection of CO2Riaz et al. (2006).
    Non-convective transport of dissolved gas in the aqueous phase and its impact on the
separate-phase gas have drawn little attention. Examples of non-convective transport of
dissolved gas include molecular diffusion due to concentration gradients, sedimentation of
solute molecules in the gravitational field, the Soret effect due to heat flow in the system
Mashimo (1988); Goldobin and Brilliantov (2011). As shown in Fig. 1, convective mixing
mainly occurs in regions where the CO2-saturated brine is in significant contact with the
“fresh” brine; however, in regions containing a large amount of residually trapped gas, the
aqueous phase is saturated with dissolved CO2 , and the contact with “fresh” brine is lim-
ited. In these regions, convective mixing will be extremely slow due to significantly lower
density contrast in the aqueous phase. We have previously shown that non-convective trans-
port due to Ostwald ripening in heterogeneous porous media can result in gas saturation
changes on the timescale of years Li et al. (2020). Over the long term, the impacts of non-
convective transport can accumulate and potentially play an important role in redistributing
the residually trapped gas. Since geological CO2 storage aims at permanent entrapment of
CO2 , it is important to understand these non-convective processes and assess their signifi-
cance for the security of CO2 storage.
    The first attempt to quantify non-convective transport in geological formations was
performed in a system containing brine and residually trapped methane bubbles Goldobin
and Brilliantov (2011). The authors show mathematically that in the presence of trapped
methane bubbles, methane molecules dissolved in the aqueous phase are out of thermody-
namic equilibrium, which create a driving force for non-convective transport of methane
molecules in the aqueous phase. The authors neglect its influence on the separate-phase
methane by simply treating the trapped methane bubbles as “infinite” sources. Recently,
several studies have shown that non-convective transport of dissolved gas can change the
distribution of residually trapped gas throughout the system, while the residual gas remains
trapped and immobile over the entire course of equilibration. One mechanism for gas redis-
tribution is Ostwald ripening due to capillary pressure difference among trapped gas. The

13
Long‑Term Redistribution of Residual Gas Due to Non‑convective…                                        233




Fig. 1  A conceptual illustration of a CO 2 sequestration aquifer and the system this study focuses on. Con-
vective mixing occurs in the regions where the mobile plume of CO 2 is in contact with a large amount of
“fresh” brine to enhance CO 2 dissolution into the aquifer. In regions where little “fresh” brine is avail-
able to induce significant convective mixing, we study the non-convective transport of CO 2 dissolved in the
aqueous phase and its impact on the long-term fate of residually trapped CO 2 . Non-convective transport
can result from hydrostatic pressure, geothermal gradients and capillary heterogeneity. By neglecting any
regional flow of groundwater, the studies system is reduced to a one-dimensional closed column with resid-
ually trapped gas throughout the system initially



gradient of capillary pressure throughout the system induces inter-ganglion diffusion of
gas molecules in the aqueous phase, causing trapped gas ganglia to grow or shrink. At
steady state, all the gas ganglia in the system approach the equilibrium capillary pressure
and coexist stably due to presence of the porous matrix (Garing et al. 2017; Xu et al. 2017;
de Chalendar et al. 2018, 2019; Li et al. 2020). Another mechanism for non-convective
transport is the sedimentation effect, where dissolved CO2 molecules drift in the aqueous
solution due to gravity, making trapped gas bubbles aligned in the direction of gravity re-
equilibrate Xu et al. (2019).
   These relevant studies have focused on only one specific type of non-convective trans-
port at a time, when in reality a number of non-convective processes are occurring simul-
taneously. In fact, many natural gradients in geological formations can cause thermody-
namic disequilibrium to potentially induce non-convective transport, including hydrostatic
pressure (Muskat 1930; Sage and Lacey 1939), geothermal gradients (Schulte et al. 1980;
Whitson et al. 1994; Padua 1999; Espósito et al. 2000; Galliero et al. 2016) and capillary
heterogeneity at the continuum scale Pini et al. (2012). In addition, simplifications such
as the ideal-solution assumption can yield results deviating significantly from that in real


                                                                                               13
234                                                                                   Y. Li et al.


fluids. Therefore, current studies do not quantify the significance of non-convective trans-
port and its impact on residually trapped gas. These limitations necessitate a systematic
approach for evaluating non-convective transport from a fundamental perspective.
   Despite the limitations of these studies, their conclusions suggest that residually trapped
gas may not remain trapped and disconnected over the long term, even without any con-
vective flow. At the pore scale, the mass of residually trapped gas ganglia is redistributed
through non-convective transport in the aqueous phase while the ganglia remain immobi-
leGaring et al. (2017), Xu et al. (2017), de Chalendar et al. (2018, 2019), at the continuum
scale, this redistribution results in saturation change of the gas phase throughout the system
Xu et al. (2019), Li et al. (2020). In regions where the saturation of residual gas increases,
these initially disconnected, residually trapped gas ganglia can aggregate and potentially
become remobilized and migrate into different locations in the storage reservoir. There-
fore, it is important to characterize non-convective transport in the presence of residually
trapped gas. Understanding how these processes in turn affect the distribution of residually
trapped gas and at what timescales in real geological systems are important problems to be
addressed.
   To fill this knowledge gap, we develop a fundamental description of non-convective
transport of dissolved gas from a thermodynamic point of view, integrating the impact
of hydrostatic pressure, geothermal gradient, the sedimentation effect and capillary het-
erogeneity. In this paper, residual gas redistribution through non-convective transport is
demonstrated and characterized by numerical solutions within various systems. We report
the timescale for resulting gas redistribution and its influence on long-term gas migration
in geological formations. Lastly, we compare the relative significance of non-convective
transport and convective mixing.



2 Non‑convective Transport in the Aqueous Phase Due
   to the Gradients of Thermodynamic Potential

2.1 Basic Theory

As shown in Fig. 1, this study focuses on a two-phase fluid system in a porous medium,
where the aqueous phase is continuous and the gas phase is residually trapped. The gas
phase remains dispersed and immobile during the entire equilibration process. Therefore,
the gas phase is redistributed only through non-convective transport in the aqueous phase.
By neglecting any convective flow of the aqueous phase such as regional flow of ground-
water, the system is reduced to a one-dimensional vertical column. We take water and
supercritical CO2 at reservoir conditions as an example fluid pair; however, this theory can
be equally well applied to any non-reacting binary mixtures that are mutually soluble.

2.1.1 Equilibrium Condition Under Isothermal Condition

We focus on the thermodynamic potential of CO2 dissolved in the aqueous phase, which
consists mostly of free CO2 molecules due to low pH in the aqueous phase Peng et al.
(2013). We assume that the residual gas and aqueous phases are at equilibrium, so that the
concentration of dissolved CO2 is the CO2 solubility at the local reservoir conditions. We
define the partial molar free energy of dissolved CO2 as FCO . In the aqueous phase, the
                                                            aq
                                                               2
criteria for equilibrium under isothermal condition in a centrifugal field (gravity in this

13
Long‑Term Redistribution of Residual Gas Due to Non‑convective…                            235


case) can be written as Muskat (1930); Sage and Lacey (1939); Schulte et al. (1980); Whit-
son et al. (1994); Firoozabadi (2016)
                                                        dT = 0,                            (1)

                                                  dP = −𝜌w gdz,                            (2)
                                            (             )
                                      aq      aq
                                    dFCO = d 𝜇CO + MCO2 gz = 0,
                                        2                   2
                                                                                           (3)

where T is temperature, P is pressure, 𝜌w is the density of water, g is gravitational accelera-
tion, z is elevation, 𝜇CO is the chemical potential of CO2 molecules dissolved in the aque-
                       aq
                          2
ous phase, and MCO2 is the molar weight of CO2 molecules.
   The chemical potential is dependent on both composition and pressure, i.e.,
                                ( aq )                ( aq )
                                  𝜕𝜇CO |               𝜕𝜇CO |
                           aq
                                                                                            (4)
                                       2  | dx               2  | dP,
                       d𝜇CO =             |    CO   +           |
                              2    𝜕xCO2 |P       2
                                                         𝜕P     |xCO2

where xCO2 is the mole fraction of CO2 in the aqueous phase. The composition-dependent
part of the chemical potential can be written as

                                 aq (   )|             (         )
                                𝜇CO xCO2 || = 𝜇0 + RTln 𝛾CO2 xCO2 ,
                                   2
                                                                                           (5)
                                          |P
where 𝜇0 is the chemical potential of pure CO2 as a reference, R is the gas constant, and
𝛾CO2 is the activity coefficient of CO2 . Due to the low concentration of CO2 in the aqueous
phase (approximately 2% in mole fraction) at reservoir conditions, the activity coefficient
can be approximated as a constant 𝛾 = 55.508, which is independent of concentration xCO2
                                     𝜕𝛾CO
Spycher et al. (2003). As a result, 𝜕x 2 is approximated as 0 in our interested range of tem-
                                            CO2
perature and pressure. Therefore, the first term in RHS of Eq. 4 can be written as
                             ( aq )
                               𝜕𝜇CO |                RT
                                                                                           (6)
                                     2   | dx     =     dx .
                               𝜕xCO2 ||P CO2 xCO2 CO2
                                                   aq
                                              𝜕𝜇CO |
In the second term in RHS of Eq. 4,      |
                                         |     equals to V̄ CO2, the partial molar volume of
                                                  𝜕P
                                                        2

                                         |xCO2
dissolved CO2 according to the second law of thermodynamics Sage and Lacey (1939);
Goldberg (1953). Combining Eq. 2, the second term in RHS of Eq. 4 can be written as
                          ( aq )
                             𝜕𝜇CO |
                                     | dP = −V̄ 𝜌 gdz.                                   (7)
                                 2

                              𝜕P     |              CO2 w
                                     |xCO2

Substitute Eqs. 4, 6 and 7 into Eq. 3, we obtain the equilibrium condition, i.e.,
                           aq         RT       (                )
                        dFCO =           dx   + MCO2 − V̄ CO2 𝜌w gdz = 0.                  (8)
                                2    xCO2 CO2

Equation 8 is the condition for sedimentation–diffusion equilibrium Archibald (1947),
Wales et al. (1948), Goldberg (1953), Williams et al. (1958), Mashimo (1988), Rasa et al.


                                                                                    13
236                                                                                      Y. Li et al.


(2005), Fujita (2016), Perrin (2013). The term xRT dxCO2 denotes molecular diffusion,
                                                          CO2

(driven by the )concentration gradients of CO2 in the aqueous phase. The term
  MCO2 − V̄ CO2 𝜌w gdz denotes the sedimentation effect caused by a centrifugal field (gravity
 in this case). In fields relevant to geology, the term “sedimentation” typically describes the
 deposition of particles at the macroscopic level such as sand grains; in a broad sense, sedi-
 mentation can occur in solutions of single molecules as well, such as aqueous solutions of
 protein. In fact, sedimentation–diffusion equilibrium in a centrifugal field has become a
 well-established method to accurately measure the molecular weight of protein, where the
 centrifugal field is significantly exaggerated by ultracentrifugation Goldberg (1953), Teller
 (1973), Cole et al. (2008), Zhao et al. (2013). At the equilibrium state, the concentration
 profile of dissolved protein becomes non-uniform due to the balance between the sedimen-
 tation effect and molecular diffusion.
     Many theoretical studies in petroleum reservoirs have shown that on a spatial scale of
 hundreds of meters, the sedimentation effect of molecules can lead to significant compo-
 sition variation in hydrocarbon mixture Muskat (1930), Sage and Lacey (1939), Schulte
 et al. (1980), Whitson et al. (1994), Lira-Galeana et al. (1994), Padua (1999), Espósito
 et al. (2000), Galliero et al. (2016). In this study, we show mathematically that the sedi-
 mentation effect can occur in the aqueous phase with dissolved CO2 as well, where the CO2
 molecules tend to sink to the bottom of the system.
     Therefore, the aqueous phase that is initially out of equilibrium will equilibrate through
 non-convective transport of dissolved CO2 driven by the gradient of partial molar free
 energy. The net flux of dissolved CO2 can be described by the generalized form of Fick’s
 law, i.e.,
                                                          aq
                                               𝜏DcCO2 dFCO2
                                     J=−                        ,                               (9)
                                                 RT      dz
where 𝜏 is tortuosity for diffusion in porous (media, cCO)2 is the CO2 concentration in mol
                                                                                        m3
                                                                                            , and
J is the CO2 flux in m2 s . Here, we use 𝜏 = 𝜙 1 − SCO to account for the reduced available
                     mol                           ̄ init
                                                          2
area open to diffusion, where 𝜙 is the porosity, S̄ init is the average initial gas saturation.
                                                         CO2
Under isothermal conditions, the system approaches equilibrium by fulfilling Eqs. 1, 2 and
3, and no geothermal gradients are present.


2.1.2 Steady State Under Non‑isothermal Condition

When a geothermal gradient is imposed on the system, i.e., dT ≠ 0, the problem falls into
the category of non-equilibrium thermodynamics. The difference compared to an isother-
mal system is that at the steady state, the entropy of the non-isothermal system continues
increasing due to the heat transferred into the system through geothermal gradients (Kem-
pers 1989; Firoozabadi et al. 2000; Firoozabadi 2016; Nikpoor et al. 2016). The condition
for the system to approach steady state becomes
                                   aq                      aq
                                d𝜇CO                     𝜕𝜇CO
                                        2
                                            + MCO2 g =          2
                                                                    ∇T,                       (10)
                                  dz                      𝜕T
where ∇T is the geothermal gradient. Here, we use the term “steady state” instead of “equi-
librium” to describe the state when the flux in the system does not vary with time.


13
Long‑Term Redistribution of Residual Gas Due to Non‑convective…                           237


  We compare the concentration term and the thermal gradient term in Eq. (4-26.1) in
Haase (1968) to obtain an explicit form, i.e.,
                              ( aq )
                                𝜕𝜇CO |
                                                                                (11)
                                      2   |
                                          |       dT = R𝛼T dT,
                                   𝜕T     |P,xCO2

where 𝛼T = Dx thermx is defined as thermal diffusion factor, xw is the water mole fraction,
                D
                 CO2 w

Dtherm is the thermal diffusion coefficient, and D is the molecular diffusion coefficient.
Detailed derivation can be found in Online Resource. Equation 11 indicates that the chemi-
cal potential disequilibrium can result from a thermal gradient dT, driving the CO2 mole-
cules to drift along the direction of the thermal gradient, known as the Soret effect (Kem-
pers 1989, 2001; Platten 2006; Rahman and Saghir 2014). It should be noted that the
significance of the Soret effect in CO2-water systems is still unclear. To the authors’ knowl-
edge, there are few experimental studies that measure the thermal diffusion factor 𝛼T in
such systems. Therefore, Eq. 11 merely illustrates that chemical potential disequilibrium
due to thermal gradients potentially serves as another mass transfer mechanism. In fact, the
impact of geothermal gradients is complicated involving multiple processes that can inter-
active with each other such as density-driven convection Wooding (1957); Donaldson
(1962). Complications of non-isothermal systems will be discussed in detail in Sect. 4.1.


2.2 The Role of Residually Trapped Gas in Thermodynamic Potential

When residually trapped CO2 ganglia coexist with the reservoir brine, we assume that the
chemical potential of the dissolved CO2 is at local equilibrium with the chemical potential
of the separate-phase CO2 in the gas ganglionSuekane et al. (2008), i.e.,
                                               aq       g
                                             𝜇CO = 𝜇CO ,
                                                    2       2
                                                                                         (12)

where 𝜇CO denotes the chemical potential of CO2 in the gas phase. In other words, the con-
         g
           2
centration of dissolved CO2 is at its local solubility, depending on local temperature and
the pressure in the adjacent CO2 ganglia. This local equilibrium assumption suggests that
any spatial variation of chemical potential among residually trapped CO2 ganglia will lead
to a chemical potential gradient in dissolved CO2 , inducing non-convective transport of
CO2 in the aqueous phase. For example, variation of capillary pressure among residually
trapped gas results in concentration gradients in the aqueous phase, inducing inter-ganglion
diffusion to redistribute the mass among residually trapped gas Xu et al. (2017), de Chal-
endar et al. (2018, 2019), Xu et al. (2019), Li et al. (2020).
   In this study, we demonstrate that concentration variations caused by hydrostatic pres-
sure gradients induce non-convective transport. The chemical potential of residually
trapped gas 𝜇CO (T, P) is determined by local temperature T and local gas-phase pressure
               g
                 2
P, where the gas-phase pressure is P = Pw + Pc, the sum of local water pressure Pw and the
capillary pressure Pc. As can be seen, the water pressure varies with depth z due to hydro-
static pressure, i.e., Pw = −𝜌w gz ; under non-isothermal conditions, the temperature T(z)
varies with depth as well. Although CO2 in the two phases reaches equilibrium locally, it is
out of global equilibrium due to changes of water pressure and temperature with depth.
Therefore, in regions where the two phases coexist, the solubility of dissolved CO2 will
vary with depth, inducing molecular diffusion of dissolved CO2 , thus redistributing the
CO2 until the system approaches an equilibrium or a steady state.

                                                                                  13
238                                                                                    Y. Li et al.


   By taking capillary pressure into consideration, we obtain an expression for the local
solubility of dissolved CO2 , i.e.,
                                                                    ( )
                                                 (            ) Pc Sw
                      xCO2 (T(z), P(z)) = xCO2 ,0 T(z), Pw (z) + dP      ,           (13)
                                                                 dx
                                                                     (z)
                                                                  CO2

                                                                    (     )
where xCO2 ,0 is the CO2 solubility at the local reservoir condition T, Pw , Sw is the satura-
tion of the aqueous phase, and dxdP is a partition coefficient of CO2 in the aqueous phase.
                                  CO2

Under reservoir conditions, the partition coefficient is a strong function of pressure and
thus varies with depth Spycher et al. (2003). To accurately calculate CO2 solubility while
reducing computational complexity, we compute one partition coefficient dxdP at each res-
                                                                               CO2

ervoir pressure Pw based on CO2 partition data provided in Spycher et al. (2003). These
partition coefficients are then treated as constants for calculating the CO2 concentration
change due to a change of capillary pressure. This approximation is reasonable since the
change of capillary pressure is on the order of 103 Pa, which is much smaller than the reser-
          ( ) Pw (∼ 10 Pa). Eq. 13 shows that the spatial distribution (z) and the capillary
voir pressure           7

pressure Pc of residually trapped CO2 ganglia determine the strength of molecular diffu-
sion. In turn, molecular diffusion can change the capillary pressure of gas ganglia by redis-
tributing separate-phase CO2 , influencing the driving force for diffusion.


2.3 Relaxation of the Ideal‑solution Assumption

As shown in Eq. 3, the direction and magnitude of the sedimentation effect is determined
by the partial molar volume of dissolved CO2 , V̄ CO2. Partial molar volume of a dissolved
substance is defined as the molar volume increase of the solution when adding an infini-
tesimal amount of the pure substance. It represents the “true” molar volume of the solute
accounting for the interaction between components in the solution. In solutions with strong
non-ideality, partial molar volume of a substance differs significantly from its molar vol-
ume at the pure state. Figure 2a compares the partial molar volume of dissolved CO2 and
the molar volume of pure CO2 at reservoir conditions. The data are generated by ECO2N,
an equation of state specifically designed for applications on geological CO2 storage in
aquifers Pruess and Spycher (2007). ECO2N describes the thermodynamic properties of
CO2-water-NaCl system over a wide range of temperature (10 o C - 100 oC), pressure (up
to 600 bar) and salinity condition (up to saturated NaCl brine). The fluid properties within
this range achieve an excellent agreement with experimental data Spycher et al. (2003);
Spycher and Pruess (2005). As can be seen, the molar volume of dissolved CO2 estimated
by ideal solution assumption deviates significantly from its true partial molar volume. The
partial molar volume of dissolved CO2 is approximately constant within the interested pres-
sure and temperature range, since the properties of the aqueous phase seldom vary. There-
fore, here we only show the curve for partial molar volume at 50 o C for better visualization,
as other curves within the temperature range 50oC–90o C overlap this curve.
   As a result, accurate quantification of the sedimentation effect relies on relaxation of the
ideal solution assumption. As we show in Fig. 2b, the ideal-solution assumption leads to
a negative CO2 flux, suggesting that CO2 would migrate upward under this circumstance.
This result is consistent with the conclusion in Xu et al. (2019), which concludes that CO2
molecules are “buoyant” in the aqueous phase, and thus the gas phase accumulates at the
top of the system under ideal solution assumption. However, Fig. 2b also shows that when

13
Long‑Term Redistribution of Residual Gas Due to Non‑convective…                                         239


(a)                                                     (b)




Fig. 2  a Comparison between the partial molar volume of dissolved CO 2 and the CO 2 molar volume esti-
mated by ideal solution assumption. The estimation under ideal solution assumption is the molar volume
of pure CO 2 . The ideal solution assumption leads to overestimation of the molar volume of dissolved CO 2 .
Here, we only show the curve for partial molar volume at 50 o C for better visualization, as other curves
within the temperature range 50 o C - 90 o C overlap this curve. b Comparison of the CO 2 fluxes in the aque-
ous phase due to sedimentation, calculated with or without ideal solution assumption. The flux is calculated
using Eq. 3 and Eq. 9 by assuming 𝜏 = 1 and CO 2 concentration constant. The ideal solution assumption
leads to an “upward” CO 2 flux due to sedimentation; while in a more realistic solution accounting for non-
ideality, the CO 2 flux due to sedimentation is “downward”


relaxing the ideal solution assumption, the direction of the CO2 flux due to sedimentation
is reversed to positive, and the magnitude of the flux is nearly a constant within the inter-
ested range of reservoir conditions. Therefore, the CO2 flux due to sedimentation is down-
ward, which agrees well with the fact that CO2 solution is slightly denser than pure water
Teng et al. (1997), Garcia (2001), Riaz et al. (2006).


3 Redistribution of Residually Trapped Gas

3.1 Mathematical Formulation of the Gas Redistribution Problem

As shown in Fig. 1, when neglecting any convection in the horizontal direction, the studied
system can be reduced to a one-dimensional column of porous medium which initially con-
tains residually trapped CO2 ganglia and an aqueous phase at local equilibrium with the gas
phase. We focus on the redistribution of the gas phase; at the continuum scale, this redis-
tribution is manifested as change of the gas phase saturation. The gas phase is assumed to
remain immobile during redistribution such that the only mass transfer mechanism is non-
convective transport of dissolved CO2 in the aqueous phase. The mass balance of CO2 in
this column can be written as
                            (                              )
                         𝜕 𝜙Sw 𝜌w xCO2 𝜙SCO2 𝜌CO2 yCO2          𝜕J
                                         +                    =    ,                   (14)
                         𝜕t     Mw              MCO2            𝜕z




                                                                                                13
240                                                                                   Y. Li et al.


where Mw is the molar weight of the aqueous phase, SCO2 is the saturation of separate-phase
CO2 , and 𝜌CO2 is the density of the separate-phase CO2 . The two terms on the left hand side
represent the mass of CO2 in the aqueous phase and in the gaseous phase, respectively. As
we show in the previous work Li et al. (2020), the derivative of the first term is small com-
pared to the second term, so that the first term is neglected during our calculation. Detailed
explanation can be found in Online Resource. Using Eq. 9 to represent the flux J, the mass
balance equation becomes
                           (             )        (             aq )
                        𝜕 𝜙SCO2 𝜌CO2           𝜕      𝜏DcCO2 𝜕FCO2
                                            =       −                 ,                   (15)
                        𝜕t      MCO2           𝜕z       RT     𝜕z

where the gradient of the partial molar free energy is represented by Eq. 3.
    The top and bottom boundaries of the system are closed J(z = 0, L) = 0, where L is
the column height. The initial condition for the system is stable coexistence of residually
trapped CO2 and the aqueous phase throughout the entire column. The initial distribution
of residually trapped CO2 saturation is generated by macroscopic percolation simulation,
a reduced-physics approach to accurately quantify both residual trapping and capillary
heterogeneity trapping Ni et al. (2021) (see Online Resource for details). The generated
gas saturation maps have taken into consideration the impact of capillary heterogeneity
and hysteresis. The aqueous phase CO2 concentration is linked to the gas phase saturation
through capillary pressure curves according to Eq. 13. We use a capillary pressure model
consistent with our previous study Li et al. (2020), which is shown in detail in Online
Resource. The current capillary pressure model is adopted here to represent the follow-
ing key features of residually trapped gas. First, pore-scale modeling of Ostwald Ripening
using conically shaped pore throats by de Chalendar et al. (2018) shows that for pore-filling
bubbles, a volume increase will push the bubble interface into local pore throats, leading
to an increase of capillary pressure. This trend in capillary pressure for growing bubbles
is consistent with the pore-scale analysis by McClure et al. (2016). Second, the capillary
pressure of residually trapped gas at the end of imbibition is on the same order of magni-
tude as the entry pressure of the rock Garing et al. (2017). At a low gas saturation, the cap-
illary pressure of residually trapped gas can vary within this range due to different spatial
distribution and connectivity of the gas phase McClure et al. (2016). To date, there are no
direct measurements available for the capillary pressure curves of trapped gas ganglia in
real rocks during Ostwald Ripening, and future work involving these measurements would
be beneficial.
    In summary, the system represented by Eq. 15 and the above boundary conditions and
initial conditions can be solved numerically to obtain the redistribution process of residu-
ally trapped gas phase. The system is solved by an explicit Euler scheme in this study.
The physical properties of the example system studied here are representative of a typical
carbon sequestration reservoir Krevor et al. (2012); Pini et al. (2012), shown in Online
Resource.


3.2 Redistribution of Residually Trapped Gas

3.2.1 The Impact of Hydrostatic Pressure

In regions of the system where the two phases coexist, the dissolved CO2 concentration
is determined by local equilibrium between the two phases. Under isothermal conditions,

13
Long‑Term Redistribution of Residual Gas Due to Non‑convective…                                         241


CO2 solubility increases with depth due to hydrostatic pressure, creating a concentration
gradient in the aqueous phase. This concentration gradient induces an upward diffusive
flux of CO2 . At the same time, the sedimentation effect creates a downward flux of dis-
solved CO2 . The system approaches steady state when the two fluxes counterbalance each
other throughout the column.
   Figure 3 shows the redistribution of residually trapped gas in a homogeneous column
under isothermal conditions. As can be seen, the CO2 concentration gradient induces an
upward diffusive flux in the aqueous phase to transport CO2 toward the top of the column.
As a result, the gas phase accumulates at the top of the column underneath the seal. The
increase in gas saturation under the seal leads to an increase in capillary pressure, raising
the local CO2 concentration at the top of the system (Eq. 13). The gas phase is eventu-
ally depleted at the bottom of the column, where the CO2 concentration drops below local




 (a)




(b)




Fig. 3  Redistribution of the gas phase due to non-convective transport in a homogeneous system under iso-
thermal condition. a The evolution of the gas phase saturation and the capillary pressure profile during
redistribution of the residual gas phase. b The evolution of CO 2 concentration profile during redistribution
of the residual gas phase. The entry pressure profile and capillary pressure curves can be found in Online
Resource


                                                                                                13
242                                                                                    Y. Li et al.


solubility under water pressure. The net concentration gradient decreases with redistribu-
tion of the gas phase; at steady state, the concentration gradient counterbalances the sedi-
mentation effect such that the net flux of CO2 becomes zero. The saturation profile of the
gas phase achieves capillary-gravity-sedimentation equilibrium to minimize the CO2 par-
tial molar free energy gradient in the two-phase zone. Therefore, due to the sedimentation
effect, the steady-state CO2 concentration gradient is nonzero. For the system shown in
Fig. 3, the steady state is reached in approximately 2.5 × 107 years.
    In this work, we only focus on the non-convective transport and neglected any mobi-
lization of the gas phase. It should be noted that in regions where the gas phase satura-
tion increases, the gas phase is highly likely to become mobile at some point. Although
gas-phase mobilization is beyond the scope of this study, characterization of resulting gas
mobilization is an interesting topic for future research and is underway as our ongoing
study.


3.2.2 The Impact of Capillary Heterogeneity

Evolution of the gas saturation in heterogeneous systems is similar to that for a homogene-
ous system, but local variations in capillary pressure can temporarily and locally acceler-
ate or counteract the upward flux of CO2 . Figure 4 shows redistribution of the residual
gas phase in a heterogeneous system under isothermal conditions. The reservoir conditions
are the same as for the homogeneous case shown in Fig. 3. As can be seen, although the
CO2 solubility gradient due to hydrostatic pressure is similar to the homogeneous case, the
non-uniform capillary pressure profile imposes additional concentration gradients between
layers, initiating local redistribution of the gas phase. Concentration gradients due to capil-
lary heterogeneity are reduced over time, depending on the thickness of the layers and the
contrast in rock properties. Eventually, concentration gradients due to hydrostatic pressure
regain its dominant role in transporting the gas phase to the top of the column. The steady-
state distribution of the gas phase follows capillary-gravity-sedimentation equilibrium sim-
ilar to the homogeneous case shown in Fig. 3. The overall timescale for the heterogeneous
system to reach steady state does not differ significantly from that for the homogeneous
case, due to the same dominant driving force.
    It should be noted that the main assumption here is that the gas phase remains immobile
during the entire course of evolution. In one-dimensional systems considered here, migra-
tion of the gas is limited in the vertical direction; mobilization of the gas phase in two-
dimensional models may induce convective flow and thus potentially change the behavior
of gas redistribution. This is an interesting topic and is currently undertaken as our ongoing
study.


3.2.3 The Impact of Geothermal Gradients

Figure 5 compares the steady state of residual gas redistribution in a non-isothermal case
with a geothermal gradient of 25 oC/km with the isothermal case shown in Fig. 3. The
properties other than the geothermal gradient are the same in both cases. As shown in
Fig. 5 a, c and e, the timescale for equilibration is ten times longer in the non-isothermal
cases. Although the two cases exhibit a similar pattern during saturation evolution, and the
steady-state distribution of the gas phase in both cases follows capillary-gravity-sedimen-
tation equilibrium, comparison of Fig. 5b and d shows that the initial CO2 concentration

13
Long‑Term Redistribution of Residual Gas Due to Non‑convective…                                         243




(a)




(b)




Fig. 4  Redistribution of the gas phase due to non-convective transport in a heterogeneous system under iso-
thermal condition. a The evolution of the gas phase saturation and the capillary pressure profile during
redistribution of the residual gas phase. b The evolution of CO 2 concentration profile during redistribution
of the residual gas phase. The entry pressure profile and capillary pressure curves can be found in Online
Resource


gradient in the aqueous phase is 50% smaller than in the isothermal case. The redistribu-
tion process is decelerated by this reduced driving force due to the geothermal gradient.
   The reduction of CO2 solubility gradient originates from the opposite dependence of sol-
ubility on pressure and temperature. When the geothermal gradient is sufficiently large, the
solubility at the top will eventually exceed that at the bottom, altering the direction of the
solubility gradient. In this case, the net flux of non-convective transport of CO2 becomes
downward, causing the gas phase to accumulate in the lower portion of the system. For the
reservoir condition given in the example case in Fig. 3 (75 o C and 25 MPa), the geothermal
gradient sufficient to reverse the CO2 solubility gradient is 40oC/km. In a shallower reser-
voir, the required geothermal gradient could be smaller. See Online Resource for details.
   However, in a realistic scenario where the mobilization of the gas phase is taken
into consideration, the gas phase is highly likely to become mobile when its saturation

                                                                                                13
244                                                                                                   Y. Li et al.


       (a)                           (c)




                                                               (e)




(b)                           (d)




Fig. 5  a Steady-state saturation distribution and b steady-state CO 2 mole fraction in the aqueous phase of
the homogeneous, isothermal case shown in Fig. 3. c Steady-state saturation distribution and d steady-state
CO 2 mole fraction in the aqueous phase of a homogeneous, non-isothermal case with a geothermal gradient
of 25 o C. Other parameters of the non-isothermal case are the same as the isothermal case. e Evolution of
CO 2 saturation at different elevations in both the isothermal case and the non-isothermal case. Redistribu-
tion of the gas phase exhibits the same pattern in both cases; however, the time scale of redistribution in the
non-isothermal case is 10 times longer since the geothermal gradient reduces the CO 2 concentration gradi-
ent in the aqueous phase


increases. At some point, the gas phase accumulating in the lower portion would flow back
to the top due to buoyancy forces. Nonetheless, a geothermal gradient can mitigate the
upward diffusive flux and thus can delay the upward migration of the gas phase.


3.3 Comparison of Non‑convective Fluxes

Figure 6 compares the direction and magnitude of the driving forces for molecular diffu-
sion and sedimentation. As can be seen, non-convective transport under isothermal condi-
tion is dominated by molecular diffusion driven by CO2 solubility gradients due to hydro-
static pressure. Under typical reservoir conditions for CO2 sequestration, the net driving
force under isothermal condition is negative to create an upward net flux, causing the gas
phase to accumulate in the upper portion of the system. The upward net flux decreases
as the depth of the reservoir increases. In non-isothermal system, the upward net flux
of CO2 decreases or even reverses downward due to a geothermal gradient. Therefore, a

13
Long‑Term Redistribution of Residual Gas Due to Non‑convective…                                       245


         (a)                                           (b)




Fig. 6  Comparison of the driving forces for molecular diffusion and the sedimentation effect at different
reservoir conditions under a isothermal conditions and b non-isothermal conditions. The net flux of non-
convective transport is upward under isothermal conditions, dominated by molecular diffusion due to CO 2
solubility gradient; however, geothermal gradients can reduce or even reverse the net flux


geothermal gradient can mitigate this upward migration of trapped gas by reducing the
contribution of molecular diffusion by decreasing the solubility gradient. The impact of
the Soret effect is not included in this section due to its high uncertainty involving lack of
experimental data and complex molecular interactions. Detailed discussion on complexity
of the Soret effect is shown in Sect. 4.1.
   On the other hand, the flux due to the sedimentation effect remains nearly constant due
to negligible variation in CO2 partial molar volume under reservoir conditions relevant
to CO2 sequestration. Under isothermal conditions, the impact of sedimentation effect is
small compared to molecular diffusion. The flux due to the sedimentation effect is down-
ward, forming a counter-flux to balance molecular diffusion due to CO2 solubility gradient.
In a recent study exploring the impact of sedimentation on gas-phase redistribution Xu
et al. (2019), the authors adopted the ideal-solution assumption by using the molar volume
of pure CO2 to replace its partial molar volume. They therefore concluded that the CO2 flux
due to sedimentation is upward, causing the gas phase to accumulate in the upper portion
of the system. As we show in Figs. 2 and 6, in reality, the ideal-solution assumption is a
poor predictor of the partial molar volume for the CO2/water system at reservoir pressure
and temperatures, and in fact, the sedimentation is downward.




                                                                                             13
246                                                                               Y. Li et al.


4 Significance of Residual Gas Redistribution Due to Non‑convective
   Transport

4.1 Complexities Under Non‑isothermal Conditions

In addition to molecular diffusion and the sedimentation effect, non-isothermal systems
may induce an additional flux of non-convective transport as shown in Eq. 10, which
describes the mass flux of CO2 induced by the geothermal gradient dT ≠ 0 . This phe-
nomenon, also known as the Soret effect, occurs when a non-uniform temperature pro-
file feeds energy into the system, which creates a heat flow that can separate differ-
ent species in the aqueous phase Haase (1968); Garriga et al. (2002); Groot and Mazur
(2013); Eslamian (2012). According to Eq. 11, the driving force for diffusion due to the
Soret effect is co-determined by the geothermal gradient ∇T and the thermal diffusion
factor 𝛼T . The characteristics of non-convective transport due to the Soret effect relies
on accurate measurement of the value of 𝛼T .
    To our knowledge, no experimental data are currently available on 𝛼T in water-CO2
systems. One approach to determine 𝛼T is to perform Monte Carlo molecular simulation
of water-CO2 systems, which is beyond the scope of this study. Most available exper-
imental measurements of 𝛼T focus on hydrocarbon fluids, aqueous solutions of alco-
hols and polymers Emery and Drickamer (1955), Tichacek et al. (1956), Shukla and
Firoozabadi (1998), Ning and Wiegand (2006), Stadelmaier and Kohler (2009), Esla-
mian (2012), which can seldom be directly generalized to water-CO2 systems. Both the
sign and magnitude of 𝛼T differ significantly from mixture to mixture due to complex
molecular-level interactions between species. For reference, 𝛼T in water–ethanol sys-
tems at 25 oC ranges from -0.5 to +0.29, and 𝛼T in water–methanol systems at 40 oC
ranges from -0.46 to 1.17 Tichacek et al. (1956).
    In fact, solute transport in non-isothermal systems can become extremely com-
plicated due to coexistence of other processes, such as convective flow due to Ray-
leigh–Benard instability. In this case, the assumption of non-convection used in this
study needs to be relaxed. The impact of geothermal gradients on solute transport and
redistribution of residually trapped CO2 remains an interesting topic for future study.
Nonetheless, geothermal gradients can significantly reduce the rate at which trapped
CO2 accumulates underneath a seal.



4.2 Timescales for Residual Gas Redistribution

To quantify the timescale for residual gas redistribution due to non-convective trans-
port, here we develop the concept of the “gas depletion rate.” As can be seen in Figs. 3,
4 and 5, the gas phase begins to be depleted from the bottom of the system, forming
a gas-depleted zone containing only the aqueous phase. Figure 7a tracks the temporal
location of the boundary between the gas-depleted zone and the two-phase zone. As
can be seen, the boundary moves at an approximately constant speed before reaching
equilibrium. In the heterogeneous case, the velocity of the boundary fluctuates weakly
due to capillary heterogeneity, while the overall velocity remains similar to that for the
homogeneous case. This result serves as additional evidence that capillary heterogeneity
has a local rather than global effect on the system.



13
Long‑Term Redistribution of Residual Gas Due to Non‑convective…                                            247


(a)                                                     (b)




Fig. 7  a The temporal elevation of the boundary between the gas-depleted zone and the two-phase zone
during redistribution of residual gas. The cases shown here correspond to cases in Figs. 3, 4 and 5. b Deple-
tion time per unit length tm = 1v under different reservoir conditions. All the data points are under isothermal
conditions. Depletion time for three different values of average initial gas saturation is shown here, suggest-
ing that the timescale for gas redistribution also depends on the total amount of residually trapped gas in
addition to reservoir condition. Within reservoir conditions relevant to CO 2 storage, the timescale is on the
order of hundreds of thousands years per meter of upward migration



   The slope of the line in Fig. 7a is the velocity of the boundary of the gas-depleted
zone v, which can be obtained by combining and Eq. 9 and 15. We substitute 𝜌CO2 S̄ CO
                                                                                    init
                                                                                           𝜙
                                                                                         2
for mCO2 , which is the average amount of CO2 in the gas phase initially in place. There-
fore, the velocity of the boundary v when it moves to location z can be estimated by:

                                           J              𝜏DcCO2       d𝜇
                                   v=           =−                        .                               (16)
                                         mCO2         𝜙𝜌CO2 S̄ CO
                                                               init
                                                                    RT dz
                                                                  2


The time required to deplete the gas phase in a unit length is simply the inverse of the
depletion rate, i.e., tm = 1v . This depletion time can be used as a characteristic time to meas-
ure the timescale of gas redistribution. Figure 7b shows the depletion time under different
reservoir conditions relevant to CO2 sequestration. As can be seen, both reservoir condi-
tions and saturation of residually trapped gas can determine the timescale of gas redistribu-
tion by determining the magnitude of driving forces and the total amount of gas. Under iso-
thermal conditions, the timescale for residual gas redistribution is on the order of 105 years
per meter. This time scale agrees well with the cases reported in Figs. 3 and 4, where the
depletion time per unit length is approximately 5 × 105 years per meter. For a typical CO2
sequestration reservoir shown in Figs. 3 and 4 with a 50-meter-thick gas-depleted zone, one
can expect that the gas redistribution will approach equilibrium in 25 million years. This
extended time period suggests that gas redistribution due to non-convective transport is
extremely slow such that the residually trapped gas can remain stably trapped for millions
of years.
   A study on the impact of gravity-induced flux on gas redistribution Xu et al. (2019)
reported a gas depletion rate on the order of thousands of years per meter in a demonstra-
tive case, which is ten times faster than the rate we predict. Three factors explain the order

                                                                                                  13
248                                                                                       Y. Li et al.


of magnitude differences between our results. First, the transport mechanisms investigated
in these two studies are different. In our study, the transport mechanism is a combination of
molecular diffusion due to hydrostatic gradients and a downward sedimentation effect due to
gravity in a non-ideal solution, while Xu et al. (2019) studied an upward sedimentation effect
in an ideal-solution setting. Second, the model in Xu et al. (2019) is calculated for a very shal-
low and high-temperature CO2 storage reservoir (10 MPa and 60 oC), where the CO2 density
is 325 kg/m3. Under these conditions, the driving forces for non-convective transport are much
higher than would be expected for a typical CO2 storage reservoir such as that used in our cal-
culations (25 MPa and 75 oC, 717 kg/m3). The low density of the gas phase contains less CO2,
which also contributes to accelerating the gas phase redistribution. Third, their hypothetical
pore geometry for demonstrative purposes accelerates gas redistribution as a secondary factor.
In our work, the model is based on actual properties of a Berea sandstone, which is a com-
monly used analogue for CO2 storage studies Krevor et al. (2012), and more realistic pressure
and temperature for CO2 storage, leading to a larger timescale for gas redistribution. The time
scale derived from our model is representative of realistic scenarios for CO2 storage.

4.3 Comparison Between Timescales of Convective and Non‑convective Transport

Dissolution of CO2 due to convective mixing is another mechanism affecting the long-term
fate of stored CO2Bourg et al. (2015). While non-convective transport mechanisms lead to
accumulation at the top of the storage reservoir, convective mixing can gradually reduce the
CO2 accumulated under the seal. Therefore, comparison between the timescales of the two
competing mechanisms is relevant to long-term security of CO2 storage. The characteristics
and timescales of convective mixing vary significantly at different stages of the process. There
exist various methods to decompose convective mixing into multiple flow regimes Emami-
Meybodi et al. (2015). Here for simplicity, we pick three time points to mark the beginning,
the middle and the late stage of convective mixing as characteristic times, which are the onset
of instability, end of early convection Hassanzadeh et al. (2007) and convective shutdown-
Hewitt et al. (2013), respectively.
    Figure 8 shows the timescale comparison between convective mixing and gas-phase redis-
tribution due to non-convective transport. Here, the progress of convective mixing is charac-
terized by the above three time points, where the parameters used in these calculations include
reservoir thickness H = 100 m, temperature T = 75 oC, brine density difference Δ𝜌 = 10 kg/
m3, water viscosity 𝜇w = 3.8 × 10−4 Pa s, diffusion coefficient D = 5 × 10−9 ­m2/s and poros-
ity 𝜌 = 0.2. Two examples of CO2 storage projects are shown on the same plot Bickle et al.
(2007), Strandli (2015). As can be seen, the timescales of convective mixing and non-convec-
tive mixing are approximately the same order of magnitude in reservoirs with low permeabil-
ity (k < 10 mD). In reservoirs with higher permeability (k > 10 mD) such as the Illinois basin
and Sleipner, convective mixing is orders of magnitude faster than non-convective transport.
Only after the convection shuts down will non-convective transport dominate redistribution of
dissolved CO2.


5 Implications for Geological Gas Migration and Conclusions

This study demonstrates that non-convective transport through the aqueous phase will
redistribute residually trapped gas, driven by disequilibrium of partial molar free energy
potentials. From the perspective of geological storage of CO2 , residually trapped gas is


13
Long‑Term Redistribution of Residual Gas Due to Non‑convective…                                       249




Fig. 8  Timescale comparison between CO 2 dissolution due to convective mixing and CO 2 redistribu-
tion due to non-convective transport. Three key characteristic times are adopted here to describe the pro-
gress of dissolution, including onset of instability, end of early convectionHassanzadeh et al. (2007) and
convective shutdownHewitt et al. (2013). The parameters used in these calculations include reservoir
thickness H = 100 m, temperature T = 75 oC, brine density difference Δ𝜌 = 10 kg/m3, water viscosity
𝜇w = 3.8 × 10−4 Pa s, diffusion coefficient D = 5 × 10−9 ­m2/s and porosity 𝜙 = 0.2



expected to be redistributed in the storage reservoir at a rate of approximately 105 years
per meter. This extremely slow redistribution rate suggests that residually trapped CO2 will
remain immobilized for over many hundreds of thousands of years when no convective
flow of the gas phase is considered. However, during redistribution of the gas phase, in
some portions of the reservoir, CO2 saturations will increase, causing remobilization of the
trapped gas. This could accelerate the accumulation of CO2 underneath the seal.
    The mechanisms for gas migration studied in this work may also contribute to second-
ary basin-scale migration of natural gas. Secondary migration refers to the movement of
natural gas in a porous reservoir toward the trap after leaving the organic-rich source rock
Schowalter (1979). A widely accepted theory of secondary migration states that the natural
gas moves updip in the form of a continuous phase driven by buoyancy, leaving “residual
stains” along the migration pathways. Although a residual gas trapping along the migration
pathways has been demonstrated in laboratory experiments Horseman et al. (1999), little
field evidence for residual gas is evident in core samples taken along possible gas migration
pathways. The lack of evidence for residually trapped gas is rationalized by the hypothesis
that gas only migrates in a meter-thick layer below the dipping seal and whatever residual
gas is left behind is dissolved and diluted by formation water Schowalter (1979); McAu-
liffe (1979). Gas redistribution due to the diffusion processes discussed in this work may
also contribute to the absence of the residual gas along natural gas migration pathways. In
addition to diffusing into the formation water, gas-phase redistribution may aggregate the
disconnected residual gas, which may re-initiate convective flow for the trapped gas phase
at some point. Considering that the timescale for the diffusion-induced gas redistribution
is relatively short compared to the geological timescale for natural gas migration, this new
mechanism could potentially accelerate secondary migration of natural gas.
    To summarize, this study quantifies redistribution of residually trapped gas due to
non-convective transport from a fundamental perspective. Non-convective transport of

                                                                                             13
250                                                                                                   Y. Li et al.


residually trapped gas results from the thermodynamic potential disequilibrium due to
hydrostatic pressure, geothermal gradients and capillary heterogeneity. The mechanisms
of resulting mass transfer include molecular diffusion, the sedimentation effect and poten-
tially the Soret effect. Mathematical modeling shows that molecular diffusion induced by
hydrostatic pressure dominates the gas-phase redistribution by transporting CO2 upward.
Eventually, the gas phase accumulates under the seal. The timescale for redistribution
under isothermal conditions is on the order of 105 years per meter of upward migration
at the reservoir scale. Geothermal gradients can somewhat mitigate the accumulation of
the gas phase by reducing the solubility gradient of dissolved CO2 . In addition, geological
heterogeneity leads to faster non-convective redistribution at a local scale, but in the long
run, concentration gradients caused by the hydrostatic pressure gradient dominate the long-
term redistribution of CO2 . It is shown that the residually trapped gas phase could remain
trapped over an extended time period when no convective flow of the gas phase is consid-
ered. However, accumulation of the gas phase due to capillary heterogeneity may remobi-
lize some of the trapped CO2 and thus significantly accelerate the redistribution process.

Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material available at https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1007/​s11242-​021-​01722-y.Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary
material available at https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s11242-​021-​01722-y.

Funding This study was funded by the Global Climate and Energy Project (GCEP), the Stanford Center for
Carbon Storage (SCCS), and the Center of Nanoscale Controls on Geologic CO2 (NCGC) funded by the
U.S. Department of Energy, under contract number DE-AC02-05CH11231.

 Data Availability This study focuses on developing a generalizable, conceptual model; therefore, no field
data is used. All parameters used for the conceptual model are listed in the Online Resource with relevant
references.

Code Availability Not applicable.

Declarations
Conflicts of interest The authors acknowledge no conflicting financial support for this work.




References
Archibald, W.: A demonstration of some new methods of determining molecular weights from the data of
     the ultracentrifuge. J. Phys. Chem. 51(5), 1204–1214 (1947)
Bickle, M., Chadwick, A., Huppert, H.E., Hallworth, M., Lyle, S.: Modelling carbon dioxide accumulation
     at sleipner: implications for underground carbon storage. Earth Planet. Sci. Lett. 255(1–2), 164–176
     (2007)
Bourg, I.C., Beckingham, L.E., DePaolo, D.J.: The nanoscale basis of co2 trapping for geologic storage.
     Environ. Sci Technol. 49(17), 10265–10284 (2015)
Burnside, N., Naylor, M.: Review and implications of relative permeability of co2/brine systems and resid-
     ual trapping of co2. Int. J. Greenh. Gas Control 23, 1–11 (2014)
de Chalendar, J.A., Garing, C., Benson, S.M.: Pore-scale modelling of ostwald ripening. J. Fluid Mech. 835,
     363–392 (2018)
de Chalendar, J.A., Garing, C., Benson, S.M.: Pore-scale modelling of ostwald ripening-corrigendum. J.
     Fluid Mech. 866, 929–929 (2019)
Chatzis, I., Morrow, N.R., Lim, H.T., et al.: Magnitude and detailed structure of residual oil saturation. Soc.
     Pet. Eng. J. 23(02), 311–326 (1983)
Claypool, G.E., Kaplan, I.: The origin and distribution of methane in marine sediments Natural gases in
     marine sediments, pp. 99–139. Springer, Berlin (1974)


13
Long‑Term Redistribution of Residual Gas Due to Non‑convective…                                           251


Cole, J.L., Lary, J.W., Moody, T.P., Laue, T.M.: Analytical ultracentrifugation: sedimentation velocity and
      sedimentation equilibrium. Methods Cell. Biol. 84, 143–179 (2008)
De Groot, S.R., Mazur, P.: Non-equilibrium thermodynamics. Courier Corporation, USA (2013)
Donaldson, I.: Temperature gradients in the upper layers of the earth’s crust due to convective water flows. J.
      Geophys. Res. 67(9), 3449–3459 (1962)
Emami-Meybodi, H., Hassanzadeh, H., Green, C.P., Ennis-King, J.: Convective dissolution of co2 in saline
      aquifers: progress in modeling and experiments. Int. J. Greenh. Gas Control 40, 238–266 (2015)
Emery, A., Jr., Drickamer, H.: Thermal diffusion in polymer solutions. J. Chem. Phys. 23(12), 2252–2257
      (1955)
Ennis-King, J., Paterson, L., et al.: Role of convective mixing in the long-term storage of carbon dioxide
      in deep saline formations. In: SPE annual technical conference and exhibition, Society of Petroleum
      Engineers (2003)
Ennis-King, J., Preston, I., Paterson, L.: Onset of convection in anisotropic porous media subject to a rapid
      change in boundary conditions. Phys. Fluids 17(8), 084107 (2005)
Eslamian, M.: Advances in thermodiffusion and thermophoresis (soret effect) in liquid mixtures. Frontiers
      in Heat and Mass Transfer (FHMT) 2(4) (2012)
Espósito, R.O., Castier, M., Tavares, F.W.: Calculations of thermodynamic equilibrium in systems subject to
      gravitational fields. Chem. Eng. Sci. 55(17), 3495–3504 (2000)
Firoozabadi, A.: Thermodynamics and applications in hydrocarbon energy production. McGraw-Hill Edu-
      cation, USA (2016)
Firoozabadi, A., Ghorayeb, K., Shukla, K.: Theoretical model of thermal diffusion factors in multicompo-
      nent mixtures. AIChE J. 46(5), 892–900 (2000)
Fujita, H.: Mathematical theory of sedimentation analysis. Elsevier, Berlin (2016)
Galliero, G., Bataller, H., Croccolo, F., Vermorel, R., Artola, P.A., Rousseau, B., Vesovic, V., Bou-Ali, M.,
      De Zárate, J.M.O., Xu, S., et al.: Impact of thermodiffusion on the initial vertical distribution of spe-
      cies in hydrocarbon reservoirs. Microgravity Sci. Technol. 28(2), 79–86 (2016)
Garcia, J.E.: Density of aqueous solutions of co2. Tech. rep., Lawrence Berkeley National Lab.(LBNL),
      Berkeley, CA (United States) (2001)
Garing, C., de Chalendar, J.A., Voltolini, M., Ajo-Franklin, J.B., Benson, S.M.: Pore-scale capillary pres-
      sure analysis using multi-scale x-ray micromotography. Adv. Water Resour. 104, 223–241 (2017)
Garriga, A., Kurchan, J., Ritort, F.: Strong soret effect in one dimension. J. Statist. Phys. 106(1–2), 109–123
      (2002)
Goldberg, R.J.: Sedimentation in the ultracentrifuge. J. Phys. Chem. 57(2), 194–202 (1953)
Goldobin, D.S., Brilliantov, N.V.: Diffusive counter dispersion of mass in bubbly media. Phys. Rev. E 84(5),
      056328 (2011)
Haase, R.: Thermodynamics of irreversible processes. Addison-Wesley, Boston (1968)
Hassanzadeh, H., Pooladi-Darvish, M., Keith, D.W.: Scaling behavior of convective mixing, with applica-
      tion to geological storage of co2. AIChE J. 53(5), 1121–1131 (2007)
Hesse, M., Tchelepi, H.A., Orr, F.M., et al.: Scaling analysis of the migration of co2 in saline aquifers. In:
      SPE Annual Technical Conference and Exhibition, Society of Petroleum Engineers (2006)
Hewitt, D.R., Neufeld, J.A., Lister, J.R.: Convective shutdown in a porous medium at high rayleigh number.
      J. Fluid Mech. 719, 551–586 (2013)
Horseman, S., Harrington, J., Sellin, P.: Gas migration in clay barriers. Eng. Geol. 54(1–2), 139–149 (1999)
Iglauer, S., Paluszny, A., Pentland, C.H., Blunt, M.J.: Residual co2 imaged with x-ray micro-tomography.
      Geophysical Research Letters 38(21), 0094–8276 (2011). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1029/​2011G​L0496​80
Jiang, F., Tsuji, T.: Impact of interfacial tension on residual co2 clusters in porous sandstone. Water Resour.
      Res. 51(3), 1710–1722 (2015)
Juanes, R., Spiteri, E., Orr, Jr F., Blunt, M. J.: Impact of relative permeability hysteresis on geological co2
      storage. Water Resour. Res. 42(12), 0043–1397 (2006). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1029/​2005W​R0048​06
Kempers, L.: A comprehensive thermodynamic theory of the soret effect in a multicomponent gas, liquid, or
      solid. J. Chem. Phys. 115(14), 6330–6341 (2001)
Kempers, L.J.: A thermodynamic theory of the soret effect in a multicomponent liquid. J. Chem. Phys.
      90(11), 6541–6548 (1989)
Krevor, S.C.M., Pini, R., Zuo, L., Benson, S.M.: Relative permeability and trapping of co2 and water in
      sandstone rocks at reservoir conditions. Water Resour. Res. 48(2) (2012). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1029/​
      2011W​R0108​59
Kumar, A., Noh, M., Pope, G., Sepehrnoori, K., Bryant, S., Lake, L., et al.: Reservoir simulation of co2 stor-
      age in deep saline aquifers. In: SPE/DOE Symposium on Improved Oil Recovery, Society of Petroleum
      Engineers (2004)




                                                                                                 13
252                                                                                                       Y. Li et al.


Kumar, A., Noh, M.H., Ozah, R.C., Pope, G.A., Bryant, S.L., Sepehrnoori, K., Lake, L.W., et al.: Reservoir
      simulation of co 2 storage in aquifers. Spe J. 10(03), 336–348 (2005)
Lei, L., Seol, Y.: Pore-scale investigation of methane hydrate-bearing sediments under triaxial condition.
      Geophys. Res. Lett. 47(5), e2019GL086 (2020). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1029/​2019G​L0864​48
Li, Y., Garing, C., Benson, S.M.: A continuum-scale representation of ostwald ripening in heterogeneous
      porous media. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 889 (2020). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​jfm.​2020.​53
Lira-Galeana, C., Firoozabadi, A., Prausnitz, J.M.: Computation of compositional grading in hydrocarbon
      reservoirs application of continuous thermodynamics. Fluid Phase Equilibria 102(2), 143–158 (1994)
Mashimo, T.: Self-consistent approach to the diffusion induced by a centrifugal field in condensed matter:
      sedimentation. Phys. Rev. A 38(8), 4149 (1988)
McAuliffe, C.D.: Oil and gas migration-chemical and physical constraints. AAPG Bullet. 63(5), 761–781
      (1979)
McClure, J.E., Berrill, M.A., Gray, W.G., Miller, C.T.: Influence of phase connectivity on the relationship
      among capillary pressure fluid saturation and interfacial area in two-fluid-phase porous medium sys-
      tems. Phys. Rev. E 94(3), 033102 (2016)
Mo, S., Zweigel, P., Lindeberg, E.G., Akervoll, I., et al.: Effect of geologic parameters on co2 storage in
      deep saline aquifers. In: SPE Europec/EAGE Annual Conference, Society of Petroleum Engineers
      (2005). https://​doi.​org/​10.​2118/​93952-​MS
Muskat, M.: Distribution of non-reacting fluids in the gravitational field. Phys. Rev. 35(11), 1384 (1930)
Neufeld, J.A., Hesse, M.A., Riaz, A., Hallworth, M.A., Tchelepi, H.A., Huppert, H.E.: Convective dissolu-
      tion of carbon dioxide in saline aquifers. Geophysical Res. Lett. 37(22) (2010). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1029/​
      2010G​L0447​28
Ni, H., Møyner, O., Kurtev, K.D., Benson, S.M.: Quantifying co2 capillary heterogeneity trapping through
      macroscopic percolation simulation. Adv. Water Resour. 155(103), 990 (2021)
Nikpoor, M.H., Dejam, M., Chen, Z., Clarke, M.: Chemical-gravity-thermal diffusion equilibrium in two-
      phase non-isothermal petroleum reservoirs. Energy Fuels 30(3), 2021–2034 (2016)
Ning, H., Wiegand, S.: Experimental investigation of the soret effect in acetone/water and dimethylsulfox-
      ide/water mixtures. J Chem Phys. 125 (22), 221102 (2006). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1063/1.​24021​59
Padua, K.: Nonisothermal gravitational equilibrium model. SPE Reserv. Eval. Eng. 2(2), 211–217 (1999)
Peng, C., Crawshaw, J.P., Maitland, G.C., Trusler, J.M., Vega-Maza, D.: The ph of co2-saturated water at
      temperatures between 308 k and 423 k at pressures up to 15 mpa. J. Supercrit. Fluids 82, 129–137
      (2013)
Pentland, C., El-Maghraby, R., Georgiadis, A., Iglauer, S., Blunt, M.: Immiscible displacements and capil-
      lary trapping in co2 storage. Energy Procedia 4, 4969–4976 (2011)
Perrin, J.: Brownian movement and molecular reality. Courier Corporation, USA (2013)
Pini, R., Krevor, S.C., Benson, S.M.: Capillary pressure and heterogeneity for the co2/water system in sand-
      stone rocks at reservoir conditions. Adv. Water Resour. 38, 48–59 (2012)
Platten, J.K.: The soret effect: a review of recent experimental results. J. Appl. Mech. 73(1), 5–15 (2006).
      https://​doi.​org/​10.​1115/1.​19925​17
Pruess, K., Spycher, N.: Eco2n-a fluid property module for the tough2 code for studies of co2 storage in
      saline aquifers. Energy Convers. Manag. 48(6), 1761–1767 (2007)
Rahman, M., Saghir, M.: Thermodiffusion or soret effect: historical review. Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. 73,
      693–705 (2014)
Rasa, M., Erné, B., Zoetekouw, B., van Roij, R., Philipse, A.: Macroscopic electric field and osmotic pres-
      sure in ultracentrifugal sedimentation-diffusion equilibria of charged colloids. J. Phys.: Condensed
      Matter 17(15), 2293 (2005)
Riaz, A., Hesse, M., Tchelepi, H., Orr, F.: Onset of convection in a gravitationally unstable diffusive bound-
      ary layer in porous media. J. Fluid Mech. 548(1), 87–111 (2006)
Roof, J., et al.: Snap-off of oil droplets in water-wet pores. Soc. Petrol. Eng. J. 10(01), 85–90 (1970)
Sage, B.H., Lacey, W.N.: Gravitational concentration gradients in static columns of hydrocarbon fluids.
      Trans. AIME 132(01), 120–131 (1939)
Schowalter, T.T.: Mechanics of secondary hydrocarbon migration and entrapment. AAPG Bullet. 63(5),
      723–760 (1979)
Schulte, A, et al.: Compositional variations within a hydrocarbon column due to gravity. In: SPE annual
      technical conference and exhibition, Society of Petroleum Engineers (1980)
Shukla, K., Firoozabadi, A.: A new model of thermal diffusion coefficients in binary hydrocarbon mixtures.
      Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 37(8), 3331–3342 (1998)
Spycher, N., Pruess, K.: Co2-h2o mixtures in the geological sequestration of co2 ii partitioning in chloride
      brines at 12–100 c and up to 600 bar. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta 69(13), 3309–3320 (2005)




13
Long‑Term Redistribution of Residual Gas Due to Non‑convective…                                          253


Spycher, N., Pruess, K., Ennis-King, J.: Co2-h2o mixtures in the geological sequestration of co2 i assess-
     ment and calculation of mutual solubilities from 12 to 100 c and up to 600 bar. Geochimica et cosmo-
     chimica acta 67(16), 3015–3031 (2003)
Stadelmaier, D., Kohler, W.: Thermal diffusion of dilute polymer solutions: the role of chain flexibility and
     the effective segment size. Macromolecules 42(22), 9147–9152 (2009)
Strandli, C.W.: Multilevel pressure measurements for monitoring and prediction of CO 2 and displaced
     brine migration. Stanford University, USA (2015)
Suekane, T., Nobuso, T., Hirai, S., Kiyota, M.: Geological storage of carbon dioxide by residual gas and
     solubility trapping. Int. J. Greenh. Gas Control 2(1), 58–64 (2008)
Teller, D.C.: [14] characterization of proteins by sedimentation equilibrium in the analytical ultracentrifuge
     Methods in enzymology, pp. 346–441. Elsevier, Hoboken (1973)
Teng, H., Yamasaki, A., Chun, M.K., Lee, H.: Solubility of liquid co2in water at temperatures from 278 k to
     293 k and pressures from 6.44 mpa to 29.49 mpa and densities of the corresponding aqueous solutions.
     J. Chem. Thermodyn. 29(11), 1301–1310 (1997)
Tichacek, L., Kmak, W., Drickamer, H.: Thermal diffusion in liquids; the effect of non-ideality and associa-
     tion. J. Phys. Chem. 60(5), 660–665 (1956)
Wales, M., Williams, J., Thompson, J., Ewart, R.: Sedimentation equilibria of polydisperse non-ideal solutes
     experiment. J. Phys. Chem. 52(6), 983–998 (1948)
Whitson, C. H., Belery, P., et al.: Compositional gradients in petroleum reservoirs. In: University of Tulsa
     centennial petroleum engineering symposium, Society of Petroleum Engineers (1994)
Williams, J., Van Holde, K.E., Baldwin, R.L., Fujita, H.: The theory of sedimentation analysis. Chem. Rev.
     58(4), 715–744 (1958)
Wooding, R.: Steady state free thermal convection of liquid in a saturated permeable medium. J. Fluid
     Mech. 2(3), 273–285 (1957)
Xu, K., Bonnecaze, R., Balhoff, M.: Egalitarianism among bubbles in porous media: an ostwald ripening
     derived anticoarsening phenomenon. Phys. Rev. Lett. 119(26), 264502 (2017)
Xu, K., Mehmani, Y., Shang, L., Xiong, Q.: Gravity-induced bubble ripening in porous media and its impact
     on capillary trapping stability. Geophys. Res. Lett. 46(23), 13804–13813 (2019)
Zhao, H., Brautigam, C.A., Ghirlando, R., Schuck, P.: Overview of current methods in sedimentation veloc-
     ity and sedimentation equilibrium analytical ultracentrifugation. Current Protocols Protein Sci. 71(1),
     20 (2013)

Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional affiliations.




                                                                                                 13
