Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Robert Crown Law Library, on 01 Apr 2021 at 20:19:08, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2020.53




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           J. Fluid Mech. (2020), vol. 889, A14. c The Author(s), 2020.                          889 A14-1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Published by Cambridge University Press
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           doi:10.1017/jfm.2020.53


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              A continuum-scale representation of Ostwald
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ripening in heterogeneous porous media

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Yaxin Li1, †, Charlotte Garing2 and Sally M. Benson1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1 Department of Energy Resources Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2 Department of Geology, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (Received 13 June 2019; revised 20 November 2019; accepted 13 January 2020)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ostwald ripening is a pore-scale phenomenon that coarsens a dispersed phase
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           until thermodynamic equilibrium. Based on our previous finding that multi-bubble
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           equilibrium is possible and likely in complex porous media, we develop a new
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           continuum-scale model for Ostwald ripening in heterogeneous porous media. In this
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           model, porous media with two different capillary pressure curves are put into contact,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           allowing only diffusive flow through the aqueous phase to redistribute a trapped gas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           phase. Results show that Ostwald ripening can increase the gas saturation in one
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           medium while decreasing the gas saturation in the other, even when the gas phase
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           is trapped in pore spaces by capillary forces. We develop an analogous retardation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           factor to show that the characteristic time for Ostwald ripening is about 105 times
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           slower than a single-phase diffusion problem due to the fact that separate-phase gas
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           requires a much larger amount of mass transfer before equilibrium is established.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           An approximate solution has been developed to predict the saturation redistribution
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           between the two media. The model has been validated by numerical simulation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           over a wide range of physical parameters. Millimetre to centimetre-scale systems
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           come to equilibrium in years, ranging up to 10 000 years and longer for metre-scale
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           systems. These findings are particularly relevant for geological CO2 storage, where
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           residual trapping is an important mechanism for immobilizing CO2 . Our work
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           demonstrates that Ostwald ripening due to heterogeneity in porous media is slow
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           and on a similar time scale compared to other processes that redistribute trapped CO2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           such as convective mixing.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Key words: bubble dynamics, multiphase flow, porous media




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1. Introduction
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ostwald ripening is a phase coarsening phenomenon that has been observed in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           various systems where a dispersed second phase is present (Greenwood 1956; Lifshitz
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           & Slyozov 1961; Plesset & Sadhal 1982; Voorhees 1985, 1992). In a bulk liquid, the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           dispersed phase in the form of bubbles is coarsened by growth of large bubbles at

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               † Email address for correspondence: yaxinl@stanford.edu
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Robert Crown Law Library, on 01 Apr 2021 at 20:19:08, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2020.53




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           889 A14-2                 Y. Li, C. Garing and S. M. Benson
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           the expense of small bubbles. Capillary pressure of a bubble can be expressed as a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           function of its radius according to Laplace’s law, i.e.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2σ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Pc =      ,                                 (1.1)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           where Pc is the pressure difference between the two phases, σ is the interfacial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           tension and r is the interfacial radius. Coexistence of bubbles of different sizes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           leads to capillary pressure gradients within the system, serving as the driving force
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           for Ostwald ripening. The mass fraction of dissolved gas species in the continuous
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           phase adjacent to an interface is proportional to local capillary pressure according to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Henry’s law, i.e.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Pw + Pc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   X=           ,                               (1.2)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           where X is the mass fraction of dissolved gas species in the adjacent continuous phase,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Pw is the pressure of the continuous phase and H is Henry’s constant. This mass
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           fraction gradient drives mass flux from the bubbles with high capillary pressure toward
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           regions of low capillary pressure.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              In a bulk liquid, the interfacial radius is equivalent to the bubble radius because the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           interface is spherical and can grow without spatial restriction. In a porous medium,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           however, the presence of a solid matrix adds complexity to the Ostwald ripening
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           process. The shape of each individual ganglion is strongly restricted by local pore
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           topography, and interfacial radii at free interfaces are strongly dependent on pore
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           geometry (Bear 2013). Given the circumstances, capillary pressure of a ganglion is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           rather a complex function of local pore topography and pore size instead of its volume
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (Garing et al. 2017). This fact leads to difficulty when predicting mass redistribution
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           of dispersed ganglia by Ostwald ripening due to capillary pressure gradients.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Past studies of Ostwald ripening in porous media have dealt with this complexity
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           in a number of ways. For example, Ostwald ripening has been neglected because
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           concentration gradients imposed by the rate of change of the supersaturation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           were significantly larger than those driving Ostwald ripening (Li & Yortsos 1995;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Tsimpanogiannis & Yortsos 2002). Other studies on Ostwald ripening in porous media
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           neglected capillary pressure gradients (Dominguez, Bories & Prat 2000; Goldobin &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Brilliantov 2011). In recent years, Ostwald ripening in porous media driven by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           capillary pressure gradients has gained researchers’ attention due to its potential
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           application to geological carbon sequestration (Garing et al. 2017; Xu, Bonnecaze &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Balhoff 2017; de Chalendar, Garing & Benson 2018). In particular, one important
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           mechanism of immobilizing CO2 is referred to as residual trapping, where injected
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CO2 is residually trapped in the form of disconnected ganglia by capillary forces
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (Hesse, Orr & Tchelepi 2008; Bear 2013). If residual CO2 ganglia coexist at different
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           capillary pressures, the resulting capillary pressure gradients will initiate Ostwald
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ripening. Consequently, ganglia may shrink or grow resulting in redistribution of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           residual CO2 and potentially, re-aggregation of initially disconnected CO2 .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              To evaluate the potential for Ostwald ripening in porous media, it is necessary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           to determine the capillary pressure of a single ganglion. Andrew, Bijeljic & Blunt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (2014) imaged trapped CO2 ganglia in a limestone sample at reservoir conditions and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           calculated curvatures of CO2 –brine interfaces. The measured curvatures over a single
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ganglion display a well-defined peak, indicating that a single ganglion is present at a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           single value of capillary pressure. This observation is also supported by an analysis
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           on interfacial curvatures in an air–brine system performed by Garing et al. (2017).
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Robert Crown Law Library, on 01 Apr 2021 at 20:19:08, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2020.53




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ostwald ripening at the continuum scale in porous media       889 A14-3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              In addition to a single ganglion, studies have shown that a group of adjacent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ganglia can reach local capillary equilibrium. de Chalendar et al. (2018) developed a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           pore-network model for simulating Ostwald ripening accounting for capillary effects
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           using conically-shaped pore throats. The authors demonstrated that CO2 ganglia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           across several pores with initially different capillary pressures could eventually
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           approach capillary equilibrium by inter-ganglion diffusion on the time scale of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           years. This finding was supported by a two-and-a-half-dimensional micro-model
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           experiment (Xu et al. 2017), where the authors reported that trapped gas ganglia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           with initially different sizes can eventually approach a uniform size. Furthermore,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Garing et al. (2017) showed that the equilibrium capillary pressure of trapped air
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ganglia is roughly at the same order of the entry pressure of the porous medium. This
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           observation implied that not only is there a potential for Ostwald ripening among
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           local ganglia across several pores, but also among the groups of ganglia in porous
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           media with different entry pressures.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              The above findings of Garing et al. (2017) and de Chalendar et al. (2018) give rise
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           to a new scenario of Ostwald ripening in the context of geological CO2 sequestration.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Supercritical CO2 is injected into a reservoir and forms a CO2 plume that flows
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           laterally and upward driven by viscous and buoyancy forces. After injection stops,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           reservoir water imbibes into the CO2 plume and traps CO2 in the form of residual
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CO2 . Residually trapped CO2 could reach local capillary equilibrium rapidly at the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           same order of the local entry pressure. Capillary heterogeneity can be observed at
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           various spatial scales above the representative elementary volume (REV) such as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           from the sub-core scale to the reservoir scale and results in variation of local entry
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           pressure (Van Genuchten 1980; Pini, Krevor & Benson 2012). Therefore, different
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           sections of a heterogeneous reservoir have different capillary pressure curves. These
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           capillary pressure gradients can initiate Ostwald ripening among locally equilibrated
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           residually trapped CO2 and may result in CO2 redistribution in the reservoir even
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           though the CO2 ganglia are completely trapped. Therefore, it is crucial to evaluate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           the impact of Ostwald ripening in this scenario on residual CO2 and evaluate the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           time scale for redistribution, owing to the fact that redistribution may re-aggregate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           disconnected CO2 and remobilize the trapped CO2 .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              To this end, we investigate the consequences of Ostwald ripening on the equilibrium
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           of residually trapped CO2 driven by reservoir heterogeneity. Three contributions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           are made in this paper. Firstly, we use a continuum-scale multi-physics numerical
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           model to demonstrate redistribution of residually trapped CO2 by Ostwald ripening.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Secondly, we develop an analogous retardation factor based on the mathematical
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           model of Ostwald ripening to compare the time scale of capillary equilibrium to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           that of single-phase diffusion. Lastly, we develop a new approximate solution for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           predicting the redistribution of residually trapped CO2 over the entire course of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           evolution, serving as a tool to evaluate the importance of Ostwald ripening at various
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           spatial scales and over a wide range of reservoir properties and initial conditions.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2. Continuum-scale numerical simulation of Ostwald ripening
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2.1. The conceptual model
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           The conceptual model underlying this work is defined by re-equilibration between
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           several adjacent domains of residual CO2 ganglia that are locally equilibrated within
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           each domain, but are out of capillary equilibrium with the adjacent domains. During
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           the re-equilibration period, residual CO2 redistributes between the domains by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           diffusion of CO2 through the aqueous phase, causing the capillary pressures of
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Robert Crown Law Library, on 01 Apr 2021 at 20:19:08, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2020.53




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           889 A14-4                        Y. Li, C. Garing and S. M. Benson

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (a)                                           (b)                             105
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Domain 1              Domain 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Domain 1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Capillary pressure (Pa)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Domain 2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CO2 diffusion

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          104       Pc2,init

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Grain                                                            Pc1,init

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Water

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CO2                                                                                           Sw1,init      Sw2,init
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          103
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0         0.2       0.4           0.6        0.8          1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Water saturation (–)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (c)                                           (d)                             105
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Domain 1              Domain 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Endpoints of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Extension
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Capillary pressure (Pa)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 imbibition capillary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     pressure curves



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          104       Pc,equil


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Shrunk


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Grown                                                                              Sw1,equil              Sw2,equil
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          103
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0         0.2       0.4           0.6        0.8          1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Water saturation (–)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           F IGURE 1. A continuum-scale conceptual representation of Ostwald ripening of residually
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           trapped CO2 . (a) An illustration of the initial condition. The CO2 ganglia are trapped
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           in pore spaces and at local capillary equilibrium. Their interfacial curvatures are uniform
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           within a domain and different between domains. (b) Capillary pressure distribution at the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           initial condition. The initial condition is at the end of imbibition where capillary pressures
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           of residual CO2 are represented by the endpoints of imbibition capillary pressure curves.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (c) An illustration at equilibrium. Trapped CO2 ganglia shrink or grow due to Ostwald
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ripening, and their interfacial curvatures approach the same value between domains. (d)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Capillary pressure distribution at equilibrium. The CO2 saturation within the two domains
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           redistributes due to Ostwald ripening and approach capillary equilibrium between domains.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           all domains to eventually approach the same value. When the spatial scale that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ganglia groups expand over is above the REV, this pore-scale phenomenon manifests
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           its effects at the continuum scale, where residual CO2 saturation changes among
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           domains. Here, we develop a continuum-scale model to link this redistribution to its
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           pore-scale origins.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              This model focuses on the supercritical CO2 –water system, but could equally
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           well be used for other pairs of immiscible fluids. The model is horizontal and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           one-dimensional with closed boundaries and consist of two domains. As shown in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           figure 1(a), the two domains are homogeneous respectively, while their capillary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           pressure curves are different as shown in figure 1(b). The two domains are connected
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Robert Crown Law Library, on 01 Apr 2021 at 20:19:08, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2020.53




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ostwald ripening at the continuum scale in porous media         889 A14-5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           to allow the aqueous phase to move freely between them so that the pressure in the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           aqueous phase is the same across the entire model.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              The initial condition for this model is assumed to be shortly after imbibition,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           after pore-scale capillary equilibrium of the ganglia within each domain has been
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           established, as shown in figure 1(b). The CO2 is assumed to be completely immobile
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           with zero relative permeability at any saturation. The capillary pressure of the trapped
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CO2 is assumed to be slightly above the entry pressure of the rock, as found in Garing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           et al. (2017). The capillary pressure gradient between the two domains creates a CO2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           mass fraction gradient in the aqueous phase to drive CO2 to diffuse from the high
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           capillary pressure domain to the low capillary pressure domain. The saturation of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CO2 within the two domains redistributes during equilibration, and the two capillary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           pressures eventually approach equilibrium, as shown in figure 1(c,d).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              We simply choose two imbibition capillary pressure curves to link residual CO2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           saturation to capillary pressure for each domain. In the high capillary pressure domain,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           capillary pressure will decrease as it equilibrates with the other domain. We assume
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           that this decrease in capillary pressure follows an extension of the imbibition curve, as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           shown in figure 1(d). The extension fulfils two requirements. Firstly, capillary pressure
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           should decrease as CO2 ganglia retreat from the pore throats towards the pore body.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Secondly, the capillary pressure curve should not fall below the entry pressure of the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           rock. For the low capillary pressure domain, the capillary pressure will increase as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ostwald ripening occurs. We assume that during this period, the capillary pressure
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           will follow the imbibition curves shown in figure 1(b). It should be noted that the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           imbibition capillary pressure curves chosen here only describe the mathematical
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           relationship between residual CO2 saturation and its capillary pressure instead of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           indicating the process to be imbibition. Conventionally, capillary pressure hysteresis
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           only applies to the continuous non-wetting phase, and the residual non-wetting phase
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           is excluded from the measurement of capillary pressure (Bear 2013). Therefore, we
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           do not adopt the concept of hysteresis to describe the capillary pressure change
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           for residual CO2 due to Ostwald ripening, and choosing imbibition curves is only
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           for convenience as it represents a reasonable trend. The actual capillary pressure
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           changes due to continuum-scale Ostwald ripening of residually trapped CO2 could,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           in principle, be acquired by measuring the interfacial curvature through micro-CT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           imaging, although the long time scales would make this very challenging (Garing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           et al. 2017).

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2.2. Description of the numerical model
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           The numerical simulator used for this problem is TOUGH2, a widely used simulator
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           in problems relevant to flow in porous media such as geological CO2 sequestration
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           and nuclear waste disposal (Pruess, Oldenburg & Moridis 1999). The equation-of-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           state ECO2N is adopted to describe the thermodynamic properties of CO2 –water–NaCl
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           systems. This equation-of-state reproduces mutual solubility in the CO2 –brine system
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           within experimental accuracy and covers a wide range of temperatures (10–110 ◦ C),
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           pressure (⩽ 600 bar) and salinity (up to full halite saturation) (Spycher & Pruess 2005;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Pruess & Spycher 2007).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              The model is horizontal and one-dimensional with two equal-length domains as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           shown in figure 1 with two closed boundaries. Each domain is discretized into 8 grid
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           cells of equal size, for a total of 16 grid cells in the model. The closed boundaries
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           on the left- and right-hand side of the model can be interpreted as the region around
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           the connection between two domains in a periodic heterogeneous system. The initial
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Robert Crown Law Library, on 01 Apr 2021 at 20:19:08, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2020.53




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           889 A14-6                                          Y. Li, C. Garing and S. M. Benson

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1.0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           krw
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           krCO2



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Relative permeability (–)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.6



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.4                 CO2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            relative
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            permeability
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.2



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0          0.2       0.4      0.6       0.8    1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Water saturation (–)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           F IGURE 2. An example of the relative permeability model used in the conceptual model
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           and numerical simulation. The CO2 relative permeability is set to 0 at all saturation to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ensure that separate-phase CO2 is immobile over the entire course of evolution.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           condition assumes the presence of a completely trapped residual CO2 phase within
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           each domain. As shown in figure 2, the relative permeability of the CO2 phase is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           set to be zero over the entire saturation range, which ensures that the CO2 phase
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           stays immobile no matter how the saturation changes. In principle, the CO2 phase
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           may become mobile when its saturation increases. However, for this study we choose
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           to investigate the particular case where the separate-phase CO2 remains immobile to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           isolate the effects of Ostwald ripening on the non-wetting phase redistribution. Future
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           work will explore the implications of remobilizing the CO2 phase.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              The two domains are assigned two different capillary pressure curves. The relative
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           permeability and the capillary pressure characteristic curves are provided in table 1.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           These models and their parameters are picked because they represent experimentally
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           measured properties of sandstone (Krevor et al. 2012). In addition, these models are
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           flexible enough to adjust the curve characteristics such as entry pressure, irreducible
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           saturation and curve steepness to represent a wide variety of rock types.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              One example case is set up with its input parameters in table 1. For the full set
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           of simulations, the input parameters are randomly generated within the ranges that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           are representative of typical reservoir conditions and reservoir properties for geological
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CO2 sequestration. For the initial condition, the residual CO2 within each domain is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           at local capillary equilibrium, resulting in a sharp gradient initially at the boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           between the two domains.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2.3. Results of numerical simulation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Results from the example case of the numerical simulation are presented in figure 3.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           During the early stages, a sharp gradient of CO2 capillary pressure and resulting CO2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           mass fraction gradient can be seen at the interface between the two domains. Here,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           the CO2 mass fraction in the aqueous phase X is defined as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      mass of dissolved CO2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        X=                                          .         (2.1)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              mass of dissolved CO2 + mass of water
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Robert Crown Law Library, on 01 Apr 2021 at 20:19:08, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2020.53




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ostwald ripening at the continuum scale in porous media                        889 A14-7

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Category            Parameter     Domain 1           Domain 2           Unit           Description
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        −13                 −14        2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Rock property          k         1.08 × 10      5.62 × 10               m              Permeability
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  φ            0.165          0.198                —                Porosity
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Capillary                                    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1 − Sw 1/λ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           pressure                        Pc = Pe + P0                                    Narasimhan et al. (1978)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Sw − Swi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           model
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Pe            3063              4248              Pa          Entry pressure
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  P0            7659             10621              Pa        Fitting parameter 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  λ             0.78                 0.78           —         Fitting parameter 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Swi           0.04                 0.04           —          Irreducible water
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Relative                                                         Sw − Swi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           permeability           krw = S3 , krCO2 = 0, where S =                             Verma et al. (1985)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1 − Swi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           model
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Domain size           L/2           0.005             0.005                 m        Domain length
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Initial condition      Pw                     13.9                      MPa         Reservoir pressure
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ◦
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  T                       70                         C            Temperature
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Dw               5.04 × 10−9                    m2 s−1 Diffusion coefficient of CO2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             in the aqueous phase
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (Cadogan et al. 2014)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                TABLE 1. Simulation input parameters of the example case shown in figure 3.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           This mass fraction gradient initiates diffusion of CO2 in the aqueous phase from the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           high capillary pressure domain to the other. Over time, the gradients of CO2 mass
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           fraction and capillary pressure decrease, and CO2 saturation redistributes between the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           two domains even though the separate-phase CO2 is set to be immobile over the entire
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           simulation period (e.g. the relative permeability is zero). The results show that Ostwald
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ripening is capable of changing the saturation distribution of CO2 between the two
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           domains.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              For the example shown here, establishing equilibrium between the two domains
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           requires a period of about 10 years, even though the domain size is very small
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (0.01 m).

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3. Mathematical model for residual CO2 redistribution by Ostwald ripening
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Numerical simulation shows that residual CO2 can be redistributed by Ostwald
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ripening even though the residual CO2 is completely immobile. However, the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           redistribution by Ostwald ripening is extremely slow. The characteristic time for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           diffusion is usually expressed as

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     l2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              tc =      ,                                          (3.1)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           where l is the characteristic length of the model and D is the diffusion coefficient.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           For a single-phase diffusion problem (only the aqueous phase and dissolved CO2 )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           with the same size of the numerical model shown in the last section, the characteristic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           time should be of the order of hours. However, the time to approach equilibrium
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Robert Crown Law Library, on 01 Apr 2021 at 20:19:08, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2020.53




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           889 A14-8                                               Y. Li, C. Garing and S. M. Benson

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (a)                                           0 years                 0.3 years               2.0 years                 10.0 years
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           pressure (Pa)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     6000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Capillary

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     5500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     5000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     4500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     4000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0      0.005     0.010   0      0.005      0.010 0      0.005      0.010   0       0.005      0.010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (b)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.04516
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CO2 mass
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            fraction




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.04515
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0      0.005     0.010   0      0.005      0.010 0      0.005      0.010   0       0.005      0.010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (c)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CO2 saturation




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0      0.005     0.010   0      0.005      0.010 0      0.005      0.010   0       0.005      0.010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Distance (m)             Distance (m)            Distance (m)              Distance (m)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           F IGURE 3. An example of numerical simulation on redistributing residually trapped CO2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           by Ostwald ripening in the aqueous phase. The evolution of (a) capillary pressure, (b) CO2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           mass fraction in the aqueous phase and (c) CO2 saturation are shown. The CO2 saturation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           increases in the low capillary pressure domain due to Ostwald ripening even though the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           separate-phase CO2 is immobile.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           for Ostwald ripening is about 10 years. In this section, we develop a mathematical
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           model to explain the large difference between the single-phase diffusion problem
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           and the Ostwald ripening problem. This model is expected to provide insights on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           the retardation of the equilibration, and assumptions will be made in this model to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           reduce complexity such as reducing variables to constants that have little impacts on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           the diffusion problem.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             As shown in figure 1, the low capillary pressure domain (domain 1) is receiving
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           the diffusive flux of CO2 from the high capillary pressure domain (domain 2). The
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           diffusive flux is responsible for both the increase of CO2 mass fraction in the aqueous
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           phase and the growth of separate-phase CO2 . By assuming diffusion only, without any
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           advection of the CO2 phase, the mass conservation equation for CO2 is

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ∂(XSw ρw φ) ∂(YSg ρg φ)      ∂           ∂(Xρw )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           +             =       φDw Sw           ,           (3.2)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ∂t             ∂t        ∂x            ∂x

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           where X and Y are the CO2 mass fractions in the aqueous phase and in the CO2 phase,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           respectively, Sw and Sg are the water saturation and CO2 saturation, ρw and ρg are the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           water density and CO2 density, and x is the distance. The term φDw Sw can be viewed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           as the effective diffusion coefficient accounting for the area open to diffusion.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Equation (3.2) can be simplified by assuming some variables are constants. First,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           the water density ρw , CO2 density ρg , diffusion coefficient Dw and porosity φ can be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           assumed constant and equal to the values in domain 2 due to constant temperature and
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Robert Crown Law Library, on 01 Apr 2021 at 20:19:08, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2020.53




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ostwald ripening at the continuum scale in porous media          889 A14-9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           a negligible change of pressure during the evolution compared to reservoir pressure.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Second, the CO2 mass fraction in the gaseous phase Y can be assumed to be equal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           to 1. Although Y is a complex function of X and local reservoir conditions as shown
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           in equations 1 and 2 in Spycher & Pruess (2005), figure 2 of their paper shows that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           the water mole fraction in the CO2 phase is near 1 %–2 % for reservoir conditions.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Therefore, Y can be expected to be larger than 99 %. Third, water saturation can be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           assumed to be 1 for simplicity. The first and second terms in (3.2) represent the CO2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           mass in the aqueous phase and in the CO2 phase, respectively. Considering Y (around
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           99 %) is much larger than X (around 5 %) (Spycher & Pruess 2005) and there is a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           high saturation of residual CO2 (Burnside & Naylor 2014), the amount of CO2 in the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           aqueous phase is significantly smaller than that in the CO2 phase. Therefore, it is safe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           to assume that Sw = 1 with minimal impact on the total amount of CO2 in the system.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Based on the above assumptions, equation (3.2) becomes

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ∂X ρg ∂Sg      ∂ 2X
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              +       = Dw 2 .                                 (3.3)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ∂t   ρw ∂t     ∂x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Changes in Sg can be expressed as a function of changes in local CO2 mass fraction
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           X by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ∂Sg dSg dPc ∂X
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   =            .                           (3.4)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ∂t    dPc dX ∂t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             In (3.4) the term dSg /dPc can be calculated from the capillary pressure model
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           for the rock. The term dPc /dX can be estimated based on the data from Spycher &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Pruess (2005) for specific reservoir conditions. Detailed estimation of this term will
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           be described in the following section.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Substituting (3.4) into (3.3), equation (3.3) can be written in the form

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ∂X     ∂ 2X
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              RCO2      = Dw 2 ,                               (3.5)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ∂t     ∂x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           where
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ρg dSg dPc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           RCO2 = 1 +               .                           (3.6)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ρw dPc dX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Here, RCO2 is analogous to the concept of the ‘retardation factor’ commonly used
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           in convection–dispersion problems with absorptive materials where the advance of the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           solute is retarded due to adsorption of the solute onto the matrix (Bear 2013). The
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           term (ρg /ρw )(dSg /dPc )(dPc /dX) is equivalent to the ‘adsorption’ term that retards the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           progress of CO2 diffusion in the aqueous phase by absorbing CO2 into the CO2 phase.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           The time scale of residual CO2 redistribution by Ostwald ripening can be estimated
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           based on the time scale of the retarded diffusion process, such as the magnitude of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           RCO2 .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              To summarize, the mathematical model of residual CO2 distribution by Ostwald
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ripening can be expressed by re-arranging equation (3.5) to give

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ∂X         ∂ 2X
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  = Dequiv 2 ,                                 (3.7)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ∂t         ∂x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           with the equivalent diffusion coefficient
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Dw
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Dequiv =        .                              (3.8)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           RCO2
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Robert Crown Law Library, on 01 Apr 2021 at 20:19:08, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2020.53




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           889 A14-10                         Y. Li, C. Garing and S. M. Benson

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Initial condition                                        Equilibrium

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Xc1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Xeq                    Xeq

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  X0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            x = -L/2               x=0                   x = L/2      x = -L/2           x=0                  x = L/2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Water-filled rock               Trapped CO2 ganglia


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           F IGURE 4. A conceptual illustration of a homogeneous case with a CO2 -saturated
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           aqueous phase and only one domain initially containing separate-phase CO2 . The system
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           approaches equilibrium through diffusive flux of CO2 in the aqueous phase transporting
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CO2 to increase CO2 saturation in the other domain. Eventually, the CO2 saturation will
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           approach the same at equilibrium.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           4. Exact solution for Ostwald ripening in a homogeneous system and characteristic
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              time
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     4.1. Exact solution for Ostwald ripening in a homogeneous system
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Equations in the form of (3.7) have been solved extensively for particular represen-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           tations of Dequiv (Fokas & Yortsos 1982; Kashchiev & Firoozabadi 2003). However,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           the problem we are interested in for this paper is defined as a two-domain system
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           with different capillary pressure curves in each domain. This situation may cause
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           the term dSg /dPc in the diffusion coefficient to be in nonlinear and discontinuous
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           forms that make the differential equation non-solvable. Therefore, we define a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           homogeneous system to illustrate the Ostwald ripening process while preserving
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           the key characteristics of the problem in a heterogeneous system.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              The system is a one-dimensional homogeneous porous medium with length L with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           two closed boundaries. The initial condition is that the CO2 saturation is non-zero in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           the left half of the system and 0 in the right half. The mass fraction in the aqueous
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           phase in the right half of the system is set such that any increase in CO2 will result
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           in the formation of separate-phase CO2 . On the left-hand side, the separate-phase CO2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           is at the residual saturation and kept immobile over the entire evolution. Over time,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CO2 will diffuse from the left domain to the right through the aqueous phase, and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CO2 saturation in the two domains will approach the same value. The entire system
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           shares the identical capillary pressure curve so that the equivalent diffusion coefficient
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           is continuous. In figure 4 we illustrate the defined system at its initial condition and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           equilibrium state.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              To solve (3.7) and (3.8) for the above system, it is necessary to find a specific form
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           of RCO2 . Firstly, the derivative dPc /dX can be estimated from the equation-of-state for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           the CO2 –water–NaCl system for each temperature and pressure. For example, it can
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           be estimated from the tangent of the molar fraction-pressure curves at a temperature
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           and near the reservoir pressure in figure 2 of Spycher & Pruess (2005). To make
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           the estimation more convenient, the tangent can be linked to the reservoir condition.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Define
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Pw
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    H0 =     ,                                  (4.1)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          X0
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Robert Crown Law Library, on 01 Apr 2021 at 20:19:08, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2020.53




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ostwald ripening at the continuum scale in porous media                           889 A14-11


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          4.5                Temperature (°C)                  55

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          4.0                                                   60

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Htangent/H0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  55
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 60                                             70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3.0                                                   75
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  70                                            80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                85
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  75                                            90
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2.5                                                   95
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  85
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  90
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2.0     95
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            12         13      14         15       16      17        18
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Pressure (MPa)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                F IGURE 5. Values of Htangent /H0 between 12 and 18 MPa and 55 and 95 ◦ C.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           dPc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Htangent =        ,                               (4.2)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           dX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           where X0 denotes the background saturated CO2 mass fraction. The derivative can be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           expressed by the reservoir condition through
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            dPc Pw Htangent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               =            .                                  (4.3)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            dX   X0 H0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           The values of the ratio Htangent /H0 can be found by interpolating figure 5 within a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           range of typical reservoir conditions for CO2 sequestration. These values are generated
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           by the equation-of-state ECO2N developed by Spycher & Pruess (2005).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Secondly, the derivative dSg /dPc can be found by assigning a specific form for the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           capillary pressure model, for example,

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Pc = a + bSgc ,      a ⩾ 0, b 6 = 0, c ⩾ 1,                   (4.4)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           where a, b and c are constants. The term dSg /dPc can be written as

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             dSg  1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 = Sg1−c .                                     (4.5)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             dPc bc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           The retardation factor can be written as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ρg Pw Htangent 1 1−c
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   RCO2 = 1 +                      S .                         (4.6)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ρw X0 H0 bc g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Here, we consider a special case where c = 1. The capillary pressure model becomes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           linear. The retardation factor becomes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ρg Pw Htangent 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       RCO2 = 1 +                      ,                       (4.7)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ρw X0 H0 b
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Robert Crown Law Library, on 01 Apr 2021 at 20:19:08, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2020.53




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           889 A14-12                Y. Li, C. Garing and S. M. Benson
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           and the equivalent diffusion coefficient becomes a constant, i.e.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Dw
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Dequiv =                       .                     (4.8)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ρg Pw Htangent 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1+
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ρw X0 H0 b
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             The boundary conditions and initial conditions are defined as

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ∂X
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               x = − , t = 0,                                (4.9)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ∂x           2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ∂X
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                x = , t = 0,                                (4.10)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ∂x         2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     X − < x ⩽ 0, t = 0 = X1 ,                              (4.11)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      X 0 < x ⩽ , t = 0 = X0 ,                              (4.12)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           where X1 is the saturated CO2 mass fraction at Pw + Pc1 , with the subscript 1 denoting
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           the domain where the initial CO2 saturation is non-zero. The exact solution to (3.7)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           is given by equation (2.17) in Crank (1975):
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ∞
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              (                                        )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1             X        L/2 + 2nL − x        L/2 − 2nL + x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              X(x, t) − X0 = (Xc1 − X0 )       erf    p          + erf      p            . (4.13)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2            n=−∞
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2 Dequiv t           2 Dequiv t

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           The CO2 saturation can be computed by combining (3.4) and (4.5),
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      dPc X − X0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Sg =              .                          (4.14)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      dX    b
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             In figure 6 we compare the exact solution with detailed numerical simulation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           of an example homogeneous case. The results of the numerical solution achieve a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           close agreement with the exact solution. The slight deviation may result from the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           nonlinearity of the capillary pressure–CO2 mass fraction relationship and pressure
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           redistribution during the evolution. The time scale of equilibration is over ten years.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 4.2. Characteristic time of Ostwald ripening
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           The characteristic times of a single-phase diffusion problem and a two-phase diffusion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           problem discussed above are

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               l2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               tc,single-phase =   ,                        (4.15)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Dw
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              l2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              tc,two-phase =         .                      (4.16)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Dequiv

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Combining (3.8), the characteristic time of a two-phase diffusion problem (the aqueous
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           phase and the CO2 phase) can be expressed as

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         tc,two-phase = RCO2 tc,single-phase .              (4.17)
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Robert Crown Law Library, on 01 Apr 2021 at 20:19:08, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2020.53




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ostwald ripening at the continuum scale in porous media             889 A14-13

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Exact solution
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.4                                          Numerical simulation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      t = 0 years
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CO2 saturation (-)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      t = 3.2 years
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.3                                          t = 9.5 years
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      t = 15.9 years

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0          0.002       0.004        0.006        0.008             0.010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Distance (m)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           F IGURE 6. The comparison of the exact solution and detailed numerical simulation on an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           homogeneous case. The two results achieve close agreement. The reservoir condition is at
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           15 MPa and 75 ◦ C. The initial CO2 saturation is 0.4 in the left half of the system. The
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           capillary pressure model is Pc = 3000Sg .


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Therefore, it is meaningful to figure out the order of magnitude of the retardation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           factor as shown in (4.7) to evaluate how the characteristic time changes when the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           separate-phase CO2 is involved. Firstly, the term ρg /ρw is typically on the order of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           10−1 , where the CO2 density is about several hundred kg m−3 and the water density
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           is about 1000 kg m−3 at reservoir conditions. Secondly, the term Pw /X0 is of the order
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           of 109 , where reservoir pressure Pw is of the order of 107 Pa and the CO2 solubility in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           mass fraction X0 is of the order of 10−2 . Thirdly, the term Htangent /H0 is of the order of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1 at reservoir conditions according to figure 5. Finally, the term 1/b is of the order of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           10−3 , where the capillary pressure values of sandstone typical for CO2 sequestration
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           is about several thousand Pascal when CO2 saturation is close to residual saturation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (Krevor et al. 2012). Integrating all the above terms, the order of magnitude of the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           retardation factor is

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  RCO2 ∼ (1 + 10−1 × 109 × 1 × 10−3 ) ∼ 105 .                        (4.18)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             The large value for the retardation factor indicates that the existence of separate-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           phase CO2 significantly slows down the equilibration process, compared to single-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           phase problems. For example, taking the characteristic length of the heterogeneous
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           system shown in figure 3 (0.005 m), the resulting characteristic time of a single-phase
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           diffusion problem is 4600 s, which is around an hour. However, the characteristic time
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           for the two-phase diffusion problem is increased by 105 , which is around 15 years.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           This estimation also agrees closely with the homogeneous case with an exact solution
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           shown in figure 6. In general, CO2 redistribution by Ostwald ripening can be expected
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           to be a very slow process for typical reservoir properties.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           5. Approximate solution for time scale estimation of residual CO2 redistribution
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              by Ostwald ripening in heterogeneous systems
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             The above sections discuss the mathematical model for residual CO2 redistribution
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           by Ostwald ripening and the exact solution for a homogeneous system. In more
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Robert Crown Law Library, on 01 Apr 2021 at 20:19:08, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2020.53




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           889 A14-14                 Y. Li, C. Garing and S. M. Benson
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           general cases, the system is highly likely to be heterogeneous where the two adjacent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           domains are characterized by different capillary pressure curves. In this section, an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           approximate solution to estimate the time scale for Ostwald ripening is developed for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           heterogeneous systems.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                5.1. Derivation of the approximate solution
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           The diffusive flux of CO2 in the aqueous phase J can be written as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ∂X
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    J = −ρw Dw      .                        (5.1)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ∂x
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Assuming that the diffusion equation can be approximated by a step function at the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           interface between the two domains, the CO2 diffusive flux becomes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               X2 − X1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             J2→1 = ρw Dw              ,                     (5.2)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 αL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           where α is a scaling factor of the characteristic length L with its value varying
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           during equilibration. The term α will be further defined in the next subsection. The
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           subscripts 1 and 2 refer to the low capillary pressure domain and the high capillary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           pressure domains, respectively. This notation will be used throughout the derivation.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           The assumption of a step function achieves a first-order accuracy on predicting the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           diffusive flux. Since the main purpose of the approximate solution is to track the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           progress towards equilibrium between the two domains instead of capturing the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           accurate CO2 saturation profile, this assumption is sufficient to serve such a purpose
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           with reduced complexity.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             The CO2 mass conservation equation for domain 1 is given by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ∂(X1 Sw1 ρw φ1 Ac L1 ) ∂(Y1 Sg1 ρg φ1 Ac L1 )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    +                       = AJ2→1 ,        (5.3)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ∂t                     ∂t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           where Ac is the cross-section area of the domain in the YZ plane and A is the available
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           cross-section area open to diffusion. The term A is estimated by the harmonic mean
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           of the two domains’ initially available area,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2Ac
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    A=                                              ,        (5.4)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1                    1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          φ1 (1 − SCO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   init
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2 ,1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ) φ2 (1 − SCO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        init
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2 ,2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   init
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           where SCO    2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          is the initial CO2 saturation.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Similar assumptions discussed in § 3 are applied to the derivation here including
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Y1 = 1 and porosities and densities are constants. In addition, the rate of change of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           the CO2 mass fraction in the aqueous phase is negligible because the supersaturation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           of the CO2 mass fraction is only about 10−5 for such a slow process (figure 3).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Combining (5.2) and (5.3) gives
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ∂(Sg1 )          X2 − X1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ρg φ1 L1 Ac           = Aρw Dw         .               (5.5)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ∂t               αL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           The term X2 − X1 can be found by applying a first-order approximation to (4.3),
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           yielding
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Pc2 (SCO2 ,2 ) − Pc1 (SCO2 ,1 ) Pw Htangent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              =            .        (5.6)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         X2 − X1                X0 H 0
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Robert Crown Law Library, on 01 Apr 2021 at 20:19:08, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2020.53




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ostwald ripening at the continuum scale in porous media                            889 A14-15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Here, the capillary pressures Pc1 and Pc2 are functions of SCO2 ,2 and SCO2 ,1 , respectively.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           The CO2 saturation in the two domains can be linked through a mass conservation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           equation by neglecting the concentration change in the aqueous phase, i.e.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                init
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               SCO       φ L + SCO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2 ,1 1 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                init
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         φ L = SCO2 ,1 φ1 L1 + SCO2 ,2 φ2 L2 .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2 ,2 2 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (5.7)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           This relationship holds over the course of the entire evolution. For simplicity, we
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           choose that L1 = L2 = L/2.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Therefore, the diffusion equation is reduced by combining equations (5.4)–(5.7) to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           give
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      d(SCO2 ,1 )                               4ρw Dw X0 H0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  =                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         dt                   1                       1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            +                          ρg φ1 L2 αPw Htangent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       φ1 (1 − SCO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                init
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2 ,1 )   φ 2 (1 − S init
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CO    2 ,2 )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ×{Pc2 (SCO2 ,2 (SCO2 ,1 )) − Pc1 (SCO2 ,1 )}.                              (5.8)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Finally, the equation can be solved by integrating (5.8) from the initial CO2 to any
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ∗
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CO2 saturation SCO  2 ,1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    before equilibrium is achieved, i.e.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1                        1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          +                         ρg φ1 L2 αPw Htangent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               φ1 (1 − SCO    init
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2 ,1 )   φ2 (1 − S init
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CO   2 ,2 )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          t =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              4ρw Dw X0 H0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Z SCO∗
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2 ,1                      1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ×                                                              d(SCO2 ,1 ).        (5.9)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   init
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SCO   ,1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Pc2 (SCO2 ,2 (SCO2 ,1 )) − Pc1 (SCO2 ,1 )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Equation (5.9) is a complete form of the approximate solution. It predicts the time
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             init          ∗
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           required for the CO2 saturation in domain 1 to evolve from SCO         2 ,1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       to SCO2 ,1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  when
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           the initial conditions and reservoir properties are known. The integration part in (5.9)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           can be solved by numerical integration or Taylor series. A complete form of the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           approximate solution by Taylor series is shown in (A 15) of appendix A. The value for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           the scaling factor α is determined by simulation results in the following subsection.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5.2. Values of length scaling factor α
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Although the initial and equilibrated CO2 saturation may vary from case to case over
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           a wide range, all cases exhibit the same trend, that is, the capillary pressure gradient
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           between the two domains declines from the initial value to zero. We define a term F
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           to represent the remaining fraction of the driving force, e.g. capillary pressure gradient,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           during equilibration as follows:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Pc2 (t) − Pc1 (t)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    F=                      .                                   (5.10)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Pinit    init
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              c2 − Pc2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Here, Pinit
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    c  is the initial capillary pressure in each domain and Pc (t) is the capillary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           pressure at an arbitrary time t during equilibration. The term F represents the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           remaining capillary pressure gradient normalized by its initial gradient. It is an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           indication of the progress of the equilibration by demonstrating the decline of the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           driving force of Ostwald ripening. The value of F is 1 at the beginning of the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           evolution and declines over time to 0 at equilibrium.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Robert Crown Law Library, on 01 Apr 2021 at 20:19:08, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2020.53




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           889 A14-16                                            Y. Li, C. Garing and S. M. Benson

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       å from simulations




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Length scaling factor (–)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.4           Mean
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Fitted mean

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0.1           y = -0.2627x2 - 0.0785x + 0.381
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       R2 = 0.998
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1.0       0.8        0.6         0.4          0.2   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Remaining fraction of ◊Pc, F (-)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           F IGURE 7. Values of α as a function of F. A total of 1000 simulations with 16 grid cells
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               are summarized. A second-order polynomial function is fitted to the mean of α.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              The value of α varies throughout the process of equilibration, and, thus, the scaled
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           length αL that the capillary pressure difference applies to varies over time. As can be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           observed in the numerical solutions shown in figures 3 and 6, the capillary pressure
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           gradient is sharp at the boundary between the two domains at the early stages of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           equilibration, leading to a strong diffusive flux. At later stages, the capillary pressure
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           gradient smears out as the capillary pressure becomes more uniform within each
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           domain. Therefore, the parameter α is adjusted to correct the diffusion length to take
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           into consideration the strong diffusive flux at the early stages of equilibration.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Numerical simulation with various resolutions is performed to find a functional form
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           for α. A thousand cases with randomly sampled physical parameters are run with 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           grid cells and 16 grid cells respectively. The two-grid-cell cases correspond to the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           assumption of step function with no spatial variation within each domain and the 16-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           grid-cell cases correspond to cases with spatially resolved gradients. The value of α
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           can be found by numerical simulation based on the equation

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            t16−grid−cell (F)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   α(F) =                     × 0.5,               (5.11)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             t2−grid−cell (F)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           where t16−grid−cell (F) and t2−grid−cell (F) are the times required by a 2-grid-cell case and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           a 16-grid-cell case to evolve to a certain F. The number 0.5 denotes that the 2-grid-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           cell case takes the diffusion length to be 0.5L. Here, α is a function of F that varies
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           at different stages during equilibration.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              In figure 7 we summarize α from the 1000 cases as a function of F. The value of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           α starts out smaller than 0.5 and increases as the system evolves towards equilibrium.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           A fitted mean of α is shown figure 7.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              The capillary pressure gradient decline curves over time for the example case listed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           in table 1 are shown in figure 8. As shown in figure 8(a), grid sensitivity simulations
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           indicate that the capillary pressure gradient declines faster in models with higher
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           resolution. This is consistent with the fact that the capillary pressure gradient is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           initially very steep between the two domains. In figure 8(b) we show the capillary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           pressure decline curve predicted by the approximate solution with and without the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           corrected diffusion length by α. Without the correction (α = 0.5), the prediction of
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Robert Crown Law Library, on 01 Apr 2021 at 20:19:08, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2020.53




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ostwald ripening at the continuum scale in porous media                                 889 A14-17

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (a)                      1.0                                                   (b) 1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Remaining fraction of

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2 grid cells                                              2 grid cells
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.8                         4 grid cells                  0.8                         16 grid cells
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                8 grid cells                                              Approximate solution
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ◊Pc, F (-)



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          with å = 0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.6                         16 grid cells                 0.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Approximate solution
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          with fitted å
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.4                    Finer grid                         0.4                         Estimation by Taylor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          expansion

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.2                                                       0.2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0     2     4          6           8       10   12        0     2          4    6        8        10        12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Time (years)                                                   Time (years)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               F IGURE 8. Capillary pressure decline curves of the example case shown in figure 3.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Category                            Parameter Lower bound Upper bound                         Unit            Description
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Rock property                             k                       1              1000         mD              Permeability
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     φ                      0.02            0.31         —                 Porosity
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Capillary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           pressure model                         Pe                       100             25 000      Pa          Entry pressure
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  P0                       100             30 000      Pa      Fitting parameter 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   λ                       0.4              0.99       —       Fitting parameter 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Swi                       0                0.3       —         Irreducible water
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Model size                              L                      0.001               1        m    Size of the entire model
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Initial condition                      Pw                        12               18       MPa       Reservoir pressure
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  init
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SCO   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.1               0.4       —      Initial CO2 saturation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ◦
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   T                        55               95         C           Temperature
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Dw                    4 × 10−9          7 × 10−9   m2 s−1    Diffusion coefficient
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             of CO2 in the aqueous
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              phase (Cadogan et al.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (2014))
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TABLE 2. Numerical simulation input parameters and ranges for sampling.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           the approximate solution agrees well with the numerical solutions with two grid cells,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           corresponding to the assumption of step function. With correction by fitted mean
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           of α, the approximate solution captures the time-varying diffusion length and, thus,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           achieves an excellent agreement with the numerical simulation with high resolution.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  5.3. Validation of the approximate solution
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           The approximate solution is validated through comparison with detailed numerical
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           simulations. To test the robustness of the solution, each physical parameter of a single
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           case is randomly sampled from a wide range that is representative of geological CO2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           storage parameters, as shown in table 2. Correlations of key physical parameters are
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           shown in figure 9. A total of 1000 simulations are performed.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              In figure 10(a) we compare the simulation results from 1000 randomly sampled
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           cases (performed with 16 grid cells) with predictions from the approximate solution
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           at various values of F. The agreement is excellent at both early and late stages of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           evolution. Errors are measured by the difference of capillary pressure decline curves
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           predicted by the approximate solution and numerical simulation in both the horizontal
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Robert Crown Law Library, on 01 Apr 2021 at 20:19:08, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2020.53




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           889 A14-18                                                        Y. Li, C. Garing and S. M. Benson

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (a)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Permeability (mD)                                                  (b)                                                                (c) 250




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Permeability (mD)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Number of cases
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      200
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        102                                                          102                                                              150

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      100

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       50

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        100                                                          100                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0           0.1      0.2     0.3                             0         10 000             20 000                              0     5000    10 000 15 000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Porosity (-)                                           Entry pressure (Pa)                                          Initial capillary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        pressure difference (Pa)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           F IGURE 9. Input parameters and correlations for the 1000 runs used to test the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           approximate solution. (a) Porosity and permeability are positively correlated. (b) Entry
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           pressure and permeability are negatively correlated. (c) The majority of cases have initial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           capillary pressure differences below 5000 Pa.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (a)                                                 F = 0.9                                    F = 0.6                               F = 0.3                                 F = 0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           solutions (years)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              103
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Approximate




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              101

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          10-1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          10-3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10-3 10-1 101 103 105     10-3 10-1 101 103 105                                 10-3 10-1 101 103 105                     10-3 10-1 101 103 105
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Simulation solutions Simulation solutions Simulation solutions Simulation solutions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (years)              (years)              (years)              (years)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (b)                                                   Horizontal error                                    (c)                (÷ 10-2)                   Vertical error
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Relative error of time




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          40%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Fsol - Fsim




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          20%                                                                                            2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -20%                                                                                           -4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0.9 0.8 0.7 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1                                                   0.9 0.8 0.7 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             F                                                                                                  Fsim

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           F IGURE 10. (a) The comparison of evolution time between numerical simulations with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           16 grid cells and predictions by the approximate solution (5.9). The agreement is fairly
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           close. (b) The relative error of time for the system to evolve to a range of F values. (c)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           The error of F values predicted by the approximate solution and numerical simulation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           measured at a range of F from numerical simulation.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           and vertical directions. In figure 10(b) we measure the horizontal difference, which
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           is the relative error of time for the system to evolve to a range of F values. In
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           figure 10(c) we measure the vertical difference, which is the difference between F
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           predicted by the solution and numerical simulation. The lower and upper quartile of
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Robert Crown Law Library, on 01 Apr 2021 at 20:19:08, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2020.53




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ostwald ripening at the continuum scale in porous media                               889 A14-19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          F = 0.9                      F = 0.6                     F = 0.3                     F = 0.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Approximate solutions (years)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            105    mm       cm       dm
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  scale    scale    scale
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            103

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            101

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           10-1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           10-3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              10-3     10-2    10-1     100 10-3     10-2   10-1    100 10-3     10-2   10-1    100 10-3     10-2   10-1    100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Model size (m)                Model size (m)              Model size (m)              Model size (m)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           F IGURE 11. The time scale of residual CO2 redistribution by Ostwald ripening within a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           range of model sizes at selected F values. The results are predicted by the approximate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           solution and validated by numerical simulation. The time scale of redistribution increases
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           with the increase of model size (∼L2 ). For example, millimetre-scale models may have an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           evolution time scale ranging from months to years. Models over metre scales may take
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           thousands of years or longer to equilibrate.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           both errors are within ±0.02, indicating that the approximate solution achieves a close
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           agreement with numerical simulation.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           6. Discussion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           6.1. Implications for the long-term fate of residual CO2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           We have demonstrated and quantified the time scale for a new mechanism for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           redistribution of residually trapped CO2 due to reservoir heterogeneity. The CO2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           saturations will increase in portions of the rocks with lower capillary pressure and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           decrease in those with higher capillary pressures. Such are the conditions expected
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           to be present after imbibition of reservoir brine into the CO2 plume during the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           post-injection period. As shown in figure 11, for millimeter-scale systems, the time
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           scale of mass redistribution ranges from days to years, varying by several orders of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           magnitude depending on the total mass of CO2 , capillary heterogeneity and reservoir
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           conditions. The time scale increases with the increase of model size L following a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           power law (∼L2 ), such that a metre-scale model may take thousands of years or more
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           to redistribute residually trapped CO2 .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              The time period for continuum-scale Ostwald ripening depends on the nature of the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           capillary pressure curves during redistribution of the CO2 . We have assumed particular
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           parametric forms for these curves, based on a plausible understanding of the pore-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           scale processes that are occurring. To date, there are no direct measurements of the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           capillary pressure curves during Ostwald ripening. It would be valuable to make these
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           measurements to include them in model calculations. This would be a challenging but
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           worthwhile pursuit, ideally done by combining both pore-scale and continuum-scale
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           measurements. In addition, we assume that the relative permeability to CO2 phase
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           is zero for all times and throughout both domains. For the domain with increasing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           saturations, it is certainly possible that the CO2 phase would become mobile. If this
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           occurs, we would expect that Ostwald ripening would be slightly faster, due to the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           redistribution of CO2 away from the interface between the two domains.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              This study seeks to evaluate the impact of Ostwald ripening on trapped CO2 ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           and, thus, geological gradients other than the capillary pressure gradient such
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Robert Crown Law Library, on 01 Apr 2021 at 20:19:08, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2020.53




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           889 A14-20                Y. Li, C. Garing and S. M. Benson
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           as pressure gradients by regional flow and other potential mechanisms of mass
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           transfer in a geological storage site are neglected. In reality, other processes such as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           brine advection, CO2 dissolution and mineralization will take place simultaneously.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           For example, advection and buoyancy-driven flows may increase the risk of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           remobilization of aggregated CO2 , while dissolution of trapped CO2 may mitigate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CO2 aggregation by reducing the total amount of residually trapped CO2 . Coupling
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           of these mechanisms would be another interesting topic that may affect the fate of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           trapped CO2 significantly.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              While this study has focused on the CO2 –water system, it is equally applicable
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           to other systems where the non-wetting phase is soluble in the wetting phase, for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           example, the methane–brine system. Hydrocarbon migration takes place on similar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           time scales to the processes described here, suggesting that Ostwald ripening due to
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           reservoir heterogeneity may play a role in basin-scale gas migration.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6.2. Trend of capillary pressure of a shrinking CO2 ganglion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           The approximate solution and numerical simulation are developed with a monotonically
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           decreasing capillary pressure model by assuming that the residual CO2 always attaches
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           to the pore matrix during equilibration. It is likely that at some point, the CO2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ganglion will become smaller than the pore body, no longer being supported by the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           pore walls. Once this occurs, the structure of the porous media no longer controls
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           the capillary pressure because the ganglion will become a spherical bubble, resulting
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           in an increase in curvature. At this point, as ripening proceeds, the capillary pressure
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           will progressively increase as the bubble shrinks and disappears. In figure 12 we
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           present a conceptual illustration of capillary pressure of a trapped ganglion including
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ganglion detachment from the pore walls. A minimum capillary pressure could exist
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           near the saturation where detachment of ganglia may happen.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Some previous works have focused on exploring the impact on capillary pressure
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           by the residual portion of the non-wetting phase by pore-network modelling.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Conventionally, the capillary pressure curve constructed by experiments is only
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           between the wetting phase and the continuous portion of the non-wetting phase,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           and the residual portion of the non-wetting phase is excluded from the measurement
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (Bear 2013). McClure et al. (2016) showed that the capillary pressure within a porous
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           medium increases with an increasing number of ganglia and decreasing non-wetting
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           phase saturation near low non-wetting phase saturations, resulting from detachment
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           of non-wetting phase ganglia detachment from the pore walls. de Chalendar et al.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (2018) showed that the trend of capillary pressure of a single ganglion is opposite
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           before and after detachment. These works imply that the trend of capillary pressure
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           of the residual non-wetting phase could be altered due to ganglion detachment from
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           the pore walls when the non-wetting phase saturation is small.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Our mathematical model does not explicitly include this last stage because it will be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           relevant only for scenarios where the non-wetting phase completely disappears from
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           one of the domains. Even so, the consequence of excluding it will be that Ostwald
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ripening occurs faster than we predict in these late stages. In figure 13 we show three
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           possible equilibrium states considering the upward trend of capillary pressure curves at
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           low CO2 saturations. For this study, we assume that the initial condition for Ostwald
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ripening is at the end of imbibition and that all of the CO2 ganglia are supported by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           pore walls. The equilibrium state is determined by both capillary pressure and mass
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           conservation. Equilibrium state 1 corresponds to the case discussed in the approximate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           solution that the capillary pressures of the two domains reach equilibrium without
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Robert Crown Law Library, on 01 Apr 2021 at 20:19:08, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2020.53




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ostwald ripening at the continuum scale in porous media                            889 A14-21

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (÷104)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2.0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Capillary pressure (Pa)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      End of imbibition   Interface retreat         Detachment


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ?


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Imbibition curve
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Imbibition endpoint
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Extension
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Free-liquid behaviour

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0            0.2             0.4              0.6              0.8               1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Water saturation (-)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           F IGURE 12. A conceptual description of a capillary pressure curve for a shrinking
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ganglion due to Ostwald ripening. At the endpoint of the imbibition capillary pressure
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           curve, the ganglion is trapped in the pore space with its interface extended into the pore
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           throat. For regions where the CO2 saturation is decreasing, as Ostwald ripening progresses,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           the interface of the ganglion retreats from the pore throat towards the pore body. At some
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           point, the ganglion may shrink and retreat fully into the pore body. Once the ganglion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           separates from the pore wall, we assume that since the rock is water-wet, the curvature
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           corresponds to the radius of a spherical bubble and increases rapidly as the bubble shrinks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           and eventually disappears. The precise nature of the capillary pressure curve at this time
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           is unknown, and the representation is provided here only for illustrative purposes. The
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           rising trend of capillary pressure after ganglion detachment are illustrated in de Chalendar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           et al. (2018) and McClure et al. (2016).


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           any detachment. At equilibrium state 2, the capillary pressures reach equilibrium with
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           the capillary pressure of one side going over the minimum value. At equilibrium
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           state 3, the capillary pressure of the CO2 -discharging domain increases rapidly after
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           detachment until separate-phase CO2 is depleted.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              In figure 13 we also show the evolution of the remaining driving force for Ostwald
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ripening during equilibration. At equilibrium state 2, it indicates that the ganglia in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           one domain are no longer supported by pore walls, but it is still possible for the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           capillary pressures of the two domains to approach the same value. Because the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           diffusive flux of CO2 is always from the high capillary pressure domain to the low
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           capillary pressure domain, Ostwald ripening will still progress in the same direction
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           as long as the direction of the capillary pressure gradient remains the same. At
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           equilibrium state 3, after the capillary pressure of the high capillary pressure domain
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           passes the minimum value, the capillary pressure gradient progressively increases in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           the same direction, which can accelerate diffusive transport between the two domains.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           The gradient may keep increasing until all of the separate-phase CO2 is transported
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           to the low capillary pressure domain. Therefore, Ostwald ripening can still progress
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           in the same direction taking into consideration the detachment from the pore wall of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           shrinking ganglia and even be faster than predicted by the approximate solution due
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           to increasing capillary pressure gradients. However, when and how the detachment
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           of ganglia happen by Ostwald ripening in real-rock systems and how much Ostwald
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ripening can be accelerated is also an interesting research question to be explored
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           further.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Robert Crown Law Library, on 01 Apr 2021 at 20:19:08, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2020.53




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           889 A14-22                                            Y. Li, C. Garing and S. M. Benson

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Initial condition




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Capillary pressure (Pa)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Domain 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1500                   Domain 2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1000

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  500

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0             0.5              1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Water saturation (–)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Equilibrium scenario 1                                   Equilibrium scenario 2               Equilibrium scenario 3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Capillary pressure (Pa)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        500

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0            0.5            1.0                         0              0.5              1.0   0            0.5            1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Water saturation (–)                                     Water saturation (–)                 Water saturation (–)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1                                                        1                                    1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       F


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0                                                        0                                    0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Time (–)                                                 Time (–)                             Time (–)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           F IGURE 13. Examples of possible equilibrium states of Ostwald ripening based on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           capillary pressure curves with a rising trend near low CO2 saturation. The equilibrium
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           state is determined by both capillary pressure curves and CO2 mass conservation. Scenario
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1: equilibrium at equal capillary pressure. Scenario 2: equilibrium at equal capillary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           pressure with one domain passing the minimum capillary pressure. Scenario 3: all of the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           separate-phase CO2 in one domain is transported to the other.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           7. Conclusions
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             This study proposed and investigated a new mechanism for mass redistribution of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           residually trapped supercritical CO2 within porous media with capillary heterogeneity.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           A new conceptual model, numerical simulation, and a new approximate solution were
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           developed to demonstrate that Ostwald ripening, a pore-scale phenomenon, can result
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           in continuum-scale redistribution of trapped CO2 . Increases in CO2 saturation could
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           potentially lead to remobilization of residually trapped CO2 .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             An analogous retardation factor is derived to illustrate that the characteristic time
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           for Ostwald ripening is of the order of 105 times slower than a single-phase diffusion
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           problem due to the existence of separate-phase CO2 . An approximate solution for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           predicting the time scale of the mass redistribution due to Ostwald ripening was
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           developed and validated through numerical simulation over a wide range of parameters
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           that covered typical conditions for a geological storage site. Results showed that for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           millimetre-scale spatial domains, redistribution and capillary equilibration can occur
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Robert Crown Law Library, on 01 Apr 2021 at 20:19:08, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2020.53




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ostwald ripening at the continuum scale in porous media                 889 A14-23
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           on the time scale of months to years. For metre-scale systems, redistribution is very
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           slow, requiring 10 000 years and longer. Although CO2 redistribution by Ostwald
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ripening is a fairly slow process and seems to have little impact at the reservoir
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           scale, at small spatial scales it can occur quickly. Understanding the implications of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           this process on long-term plume evolution will require consideration of the complex
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           interplay of viscous, buoyancy and capillary forces, along with dissolution of the CO2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           into reservoir brine due to convective mixing or regional groundwater flow.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Acknowledgements
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             This study was funded by the Global Climate and Energy Project. We thank
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           faculty members and students in the Department of Energy Resources Engineering
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           for inspiring discussions and thoughtful opinions.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Declaration of interests
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             The authors report no conflict of interest.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Appendix A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              To solve the integration part of the approximate solution, Taylor series can be
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           applied to achieve a close estimation. The integration part of the approximate solution
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Z SCO∗
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2 ,1               1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              d(SCO2 ,1 ).   (A 1)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     init
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SCO ,1     P   (S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 c2 CO2 ,2 ) − Pc1 (SCO2 ,1 )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Define
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    f (SCO2 ,1 ) =                                   .               (A 2)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Pc2 (SCO2 ,2 ) − Pc1 (SCO2 ,1 )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Capillary pressure is represented by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        −(1/λ1 )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1 − Swi,1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Pc1 = Pe1 + P01                     −1                            (A 3)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SCO2 ,1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               −(1/λ2 )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1 − Swi,2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Pc2 = Pe2 + P02                    −1                    .        (A 4)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SCO2 ,2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           The relationship of SCO2 ,1 and SCO2 ,2 can be acquired from (5.7) as follows:

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SCO2 ,2 = aSCO2 ,1 + b.                                (A 5)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Here,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                φ1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       a=−                                           (A 6)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                φ2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     φ1 init
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             b=        S          init
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               + SCO        .                        (A 7)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     φ2 CO2 ,1         2 ,2
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Robert Crown Law Library, on 01 Apr 2021 at 20:19:08, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2020.53




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           889 A14-24                                  Y. Li, C. Garing and S. M. Benson
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Therefore, (A 2) can be written as

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             f (SCO2 ,1 ) =                       −(1/λ2 )                          −(1/λ1 ) .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1 − Swi,2                             1 − Swi,1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Pe2 + P02               −1          − Pe1 − P01             −1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    aSCO2 ,1 + b                            SCO2 ,1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (A 8)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Writing (A 8) in the form of a Taylor series evaluated at S0 , we obtain

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              f 00 (S0 )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              f (SCO2 ,1 ) = f (S0 ) + f 0 (S0 )(SCO2 ,1 − S0 ) +                        (SCO2 ,1 − S0 )2 ,       (A 9)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           where
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   + SCO2 ,1 ).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         init            eq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               S0 = 0.5(SCO   2 ,1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 (A 10)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         eq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           The term SCO2 ,1 can be solved by equating the right-hand side of (A 3) and (A 4) and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           combining (5.7).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Write out the three terms about f (S0 ):

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             f (S0 ) =                                               −(1/λ2 )                                      −(1/λ1 ) , (A 11)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1 − Swi,2                                            1 − Swi,1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Pe2 + P02                        −1                     − Pe1 − P01                   −1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 aS0 + b                                                 S0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             "                                 −(1/λ2 )−1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        aP02 (1 − Swi,2 ) 1 − Swi,2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             f (S0 ) = −[ f (S0 )]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0                         2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         −   1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         λ2 (aS0 + b)2         aS0 + b
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 −(1/λ1 )−1 #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         P01 (1 − Swi,1 ) 1 − Swi,1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      −                                      −1                 ,                                                (A 12)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 λ1 S02              S0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     "                                             −(1/λ2 )−1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2[ f 0 (S0 )]2                      2a2 P02 (1 − Swi,2 ) 1 − Swi,2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            f (S0 ) =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     − [ f (S0 )] −2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               − 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         f (S0 )                            λ2 (aS0 + b)3          aS0 + b
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  −(1/λ2 )−2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         a2 P02 (1 − Swi,2 )2 (1 + λ2 ) 1 − Swi,2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      +                                                   −  1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  λ22 (aS0 + b)4                aS0 + b
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   −(1/λ1 )−1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2P01 (1 − Swi,1 ) 1 − Swi,1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      +                                       −1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 λ1 S03                S0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             −(1/λ1 )−2 #
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (1 − Swi,1 )2 P01 (1 + λ1 ) 1 − Swi,1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      −                                                −1                    .                                   (A 13)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        λ21 S04                  S0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Therefore, the integration can be written in the following form:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ∗
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Z SCO ,1  2                     1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    d(SCO2 ,1 )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      init
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SCO   ,1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Pc2 (SCO2 ,2 ) − Pc1 (SCO2 ,1 )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ∗
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Z SCO ,1    2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       =                      f (SCO2 ,1 )d(SCO2 ,1 )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  init
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SCO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2 ,1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1 2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       = f (S0 )SCO2 ,1 + f (S0 )        0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     S       − S0 SCO2 ,1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2 CO2 ,1
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Robert Crown Law Library, on 01 Apr 2021 at 20:19:08, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2020.53




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ostwald ripening at the continuum scale in porous media                              889 A14-25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SCO∗
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      f 00 (S0 ) 1 3                                                   2 ,1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2          2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  +                    SCO2 ,1 − S0 SCO2 ,1 + S0 SCO2 ,1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2         3                                            init
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SCO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2 ,1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1 ∗2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               = f (S0 )SCO   ∗
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2 ,1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     + f 0 (S0 )     S               ∗
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              − S0 SCO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2 CO2 ,1             2 ,1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      f 00 (S0 ) 1 ∗3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ∗2         2 ∗
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  +                    S        − S0 SCO2 ,1 + S0 SCO2 ,1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2         3 CO2 ,1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1 init2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  − f (S0 )SCO2 ,1 + f (S0 )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 init         0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          S              init
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 − S0 SCO2 ,1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2 CO2 ,1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     f 00 (S0 ) 1 init3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  +                   S               init2      2 init
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               − S0 SCO2 ,1 + S0 SCO2 ,1       .                  (A 14)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2        3 CO2 ,1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           To summarize, the complete form of the approximate solution by Taylor series
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            + SCO2 ,1 ) is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  init         eq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           evaluated at S0 = 0.5(SCO   2 ,1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1                         1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          +                         ρg φ1 L2 αPw Htangent
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                φ1 (1 − SCO   init
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2 ,1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        )   φ 2  (1 −  S init
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CO2 ,2 )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           t =
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              4ρw Dw X0 H0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1 ∗2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ×        f (S0 )SCO2 ,1 + f (S0 )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ∗           0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             S               ∗
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     − S0 SCO2 ,1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2 CO2 ,1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 f 00 (S0 ) 1 ∗3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ∗2            2 ∗
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               +                      S       − S0 SCO2 ,1 + S0 SCO2 ,1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2         3 CO2 ,1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1 init2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               − f (S0 )SCO2 ,1 + f (S0 )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               init         0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         S                init
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  − S0 SCO2 ,1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2 CO2 ,1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 f 00 (S0 ) 1 init3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               +                     SCO2 ,1 − S0 SCOinit2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2 ,1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              +  S 2 init
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0 CO2 ,1       ,               (A 15)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2          3

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           where f (S0 ), f 0 (S0 ) and f 00 (S0 ) can be found using (A 11)–(A 13).


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          REFERENCES

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           A NDREW, M., B IJELJIC , B. & B LUNT, M. J. 2014 Pore-by-pore capillary pressure measurements
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  using X-ray microtomography at reservoir conditions: curvature, snap-off, and remobilization
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  of residual CO2 . Water Resour. Res. 50 (11), 8760–8774.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           B EAR , J. 2013 Dynamics of Fluids in Porous Media. Dover Publications.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           B URNSIDE , N. M. & NAYLOR , M. 2014 Review and implications of relative permeability of CO2 /brine
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  systems and residual trapping of CO2 . Intl J. Greenh. Gas Control 23, 1–11.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           C ADOGAN , S. P., M AITLAND , G. C. & T RUSLER , J. P. M. 2014 Diffusion coefficients of CO2 and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  N2 in water at temperatures between 298.15 K and 423.15 K at pressures up to 45 MPa.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  J. Chem. Engng Data 59 (2), 519–525.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           DE C HALENDAR , J. A., G ARING , C. & B ENSON , S. M. 2018 Pore-scale modelling of Ostwald
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ripening. J. Fluid Mech. 835, 363–392.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           C RANK , J. 1975 The Mathematics of Diffusion, 2nd edn. Clarendon Press.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           D OMINGUEZ , A., B ORIES , S. A. & P RAT, M. 2000 Gas cluster growth by solute diffusion in porous
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  media. Experiments and automaton simulation on pore network. Intl J. Multiphase Flow 26
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (12), 1951–1979.
Downloaded from https://www.cambridge.org/core. Robert Crown Law Library, on 01 Apr 2021 at 20:19:08, subject to the Cambridge Core terms of use, available at https://www.cambridge.org/core/terms. https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2020.53




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           889 A14-26                     Y. Li, C. Garing and S. M. Benson
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           F OKAS , A. S. & Y ORTSOS , Y. C. 1982 On the exactly solvable equation st = (βs + γ )−2 sx ]x +
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   α(βs + γ )−2 sx occurring in two-phase flow in porous media. SIAM J. Appl. Maths 42 (2),
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   318–415.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           G ARING , C., DE C HALENDAR , J. A., VOLTOLINI , M., A JO -F RANKLIN , J. B. & B ENSON , S. M.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2017 Pore-scale capillary pressure analysis using multi-scale x-ray micromotography. Adv.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Water Resour. 104, 223–241.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           G OLDOBIN , D. S. & B RILLIANTOV, N. V. 2011 Diffusive counter dispersion of mass in bubbly
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   media. Phys. Rev. E 84, 056328.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           G REENWOOD , G. W. 1956 The growth of dispersed precipitates in solutions. Acta Metall. 4, 243–248.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           H ESSE , M. A., O RR , F. M. & T CHELEPI , H. A. 2008 Gravity currents with residual trapping.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   J. Fluid Mech. 611, 35–60.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           K ASHCHIEV, D. & F IROOZABADI , A. 2003 Analytical solutions for 1D countercurrent imbibition in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   water-wet media. SPE J. 8, 401–408.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           K REVOR , S. C. M., P INI , R., Z UO , L. & B ENSON , S. M. 2012 Relative permeability and trapping
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   of CO2 and water in sandstone rocks at reservoir conditions. Water Resour. Res. 48 (2),
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   W02532.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           L I , X. & Y ORTSOS , Y. C. 1995 Theory of multiple bubble growth in porous media by solute
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   diffusion. Chem. Engng Sci. 50 (8), 1247–1271.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           L IFSHITZ , I. M. & S LYOZOV, V. V. 1961 The kinetics of precipitation from supersaturated solid
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   solutions. J. Phys. Chem. Solids 19 (1-2), 35–50.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           M C C LURE , J. E., B ERRILL , M. A., G RAY, W. G. & M ILLER , C. T. 2016 Influence of phase
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   connectivity on the relationship among capillary pressure, fluid saturation, and interfacial area
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   in two-fluid-phase porous medium systems. Phys. Rev. E 94, 033102.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           NARASIMHAN , T. N., W ITHERSPOON , P. A. & E DWARDS , A. L. 1978 Numerical model for saturated–
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   unsaturated flow in deformable porous media: 2. The algorithm. Water Resour. Res. 14 (2),
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   255–261.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           P INI , R., K REVOR , S. C. M. & B ENSON , S. M. 2012 Capillary pressure and heterogeneity for the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CO2 /water system in sandstone rocks at reservoir conditions. Adv. Water Resour. 38, 48–59.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           P LESSET, M. S. & S ADHAL , S. S. 1982 On the stability of gas bubbles in liquid–gas solutions.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Appl. Sci. Res. 38 (1), 133–141.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           P RUESS , K., O LDENBURG , C. & M ORIDIS , G. 1999 TOUGH2 user’s guide, version 2.0.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           P RUESS , K. & S PYCHER , N. 2007 ECO2N – A fluid property module for the TOUGH2 code for
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   studies of CO2 storage in saline aquifers. Energy Convers. Manage. 48 (6), 1761–1767.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           S PYCHER , N. & P RUESS , K. 2005 CO2 –H2 O mixtures in the geological sequestration of CO2 . II.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Partitioning in chloride brines at 12 100 ◦ C and up to 600 bar. Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   69 (13), 3309–3320.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           T SIMPANOGIANNIS , I. N. & Y ORTSOS , Y. C. 2002 Model for the gas evolution in a porous medium
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   driven by solute diffusion. AIChE J. 48 (11), 2690–2710.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           VAN G ENUCHTEN , M. 1980 A closed-form equation for predicting the hydraulic conductivity of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   unsaturated soils1. Soil Sci. Soc. Amer. J. 44, 892–898.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           V ERMA , A. K., P RUESS , K., T SANG , C. F. & W ITHERSPOON , P. A. 1985 A study of two-phase
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   concurrent flow of steam and water in an unconsolidated porous medium. In Proceedings of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   the 23rd National Heat Transfer Conference, Denver, CO, pp. 135–143. ASME.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           VOORHEES , P. W. 1985 The theory of Ostwald ripening. J. Stat. Phys. 38 (1/2), 231–252.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           VOORHEES , P. W. 1992 Ostwald ripening of two-phase mixtures. Annu. Rev. Mater. Sci. 22 (1),
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   197–215.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           X U , K., B ONNECAZE , R. & BALHOFF , M. 2017 Egalitarianism among bubbles in porous media: an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ostwald ripening derived anticoarsening phenomenon. Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 264502.
