                                                     Kinetic Theory of Multicomponent Ostwald Ripening in Porous Media

                                                                              Nicolas Buenoa , Luis F. Ayalaa , Yashar Mehmania,∗
                                                      a The Pennsylvania State University, Department of Energy and Mineral Engineering, University Park, PA, USA




                                                 Abstract
arXiv:2512.20665v1 [cond-mat.soft] 19 Dec 2025




                                                 Partially miscible bubble populations trapped in porous media are ubiquitous in subsurface applications such
                                                 as underground hydrogen storage (UHS), where cyclic injections fragment gas into numerous bubbles with
                                                 distributions of sizes and compositions. These bubbles exchange mass through Ostwald ripening, driven by
                                                 differences in composition and interfacial curvature. While kinetic theories have been developed for single-
                                                 component ripening in porous media, accounting for bubble deformation and spatial correlations in pore size,
                                                 no such theory exists for multicomponent systems. We present the first kinetic theory for multicomponent
                                                 Ostwald ripening of bubbles in porous media. The formulation describes the bubble population with a
                                                 number-density function g(s; t) in a 3D statistical space of bubble states s = (Rp , S b , y), consisting of pore
                                                 size, bubble saturation, and composition. Evolution is governed by a population balance equation with
                                                 closure through mean-field approximations that account for spatial correlations in pore size and ensure mass
                                                 conservation. The theory generalizes previous single-component formulations, removing key limitations such
                                                 as the inability to capture interactions between distant bubbles. Systematic validation against pore-network
                                                 simulations across homogeneous, heterogeneous, correlated, and uncorrelated networks demonstrates good
                                                 agreement without adjustable parameters. Pending challenges and limitations are discussed. Since the theory
                                                 imposes no constraints on bubble count or correlation length, it enables predictions beyond the pore scale.
                                                 Keywords: Porous media; Ostwald ripening; Multicomponent; Bubbles; Kinetic theory; Hydrogen storage


                                                 1. Introduction

                                                    Partially miscible bubble populations trapped inside porous media are ubiquitous, with applications in
                                                 underground hydrogen storage (UHS) [1], geologic CO2 sequestration [2], removal of nonaqueous phase liquids
                                                 from groundwater (NAPL) [3], bubble/water management in fuel cells and electrolyzers [4, 5], and air-water
                                                 mass transfer in soils [6]. This work is motivated specifically by UHS, where H2 is seasonally injected into and
                                                 withdrawn from an aquifer to buffer the intermittency of renewable energy sources (e.g., solar, wind). Cyclic
                                                 injections during periods of peak and low demand (i.e., summer and winter) subject the porous medium to
                                                 repeated drainage and imbibition that fragment the H2 into numerous bubbles. Since the first cycle is often
                                                 preceded by injecting a cushion gas (e.g., CO2 , N2 , CH4 ), trapped bubbles end up with a distribution of


                                                   ∗ Corresponding author

                                                    Email address: yzm5192@psu.edu, 110 Hosler Building, University Park, PA, 16802 (Yashar Mehmani)



                                                                                                                                                     December 25, 2025
sizes and compositions [7]. Due to chemical potential differences, these bubbles are in disequilibrium and
exchange mass to equilibrate. Two factors contribute to a bubble’s chemical potential: composition and
interfacial curvature (assuming surface tension is constant, as we do here). These induce different dissolved
concentrations of each species at the interface of each bubble, driving mass transfer by molecular diffusion.
Such mass exchange between bubbles is called Ostwald ripening [8], which we aim to describe theoretically.
   Ostwald ripening has been studied extensively in bulk fluids, where bubbles are always spherical with
curvature κ inversely proportional to radius R [9–13]. When comprised of only one component, mass transfer
between bubbles is purely curvature-driven. A hallmark of such ripening is that all bubbles coarsen into
a single large bubble, because any configuration with more than one bubble has further room to minimize
surface energy by reducing bubble count. Extensions to multicomponent bubbles in bulk fluids have also
been made, where inter-bubble mass transfer is more complex [14–17]. By contrast, studies of ripening in
porous media are a recent development and have focused almost exclusively on single-component bubbles.
   Early microfluidic experiments [18] and pore-network modeling [19, 20] of single-component ripening
revealed that equilibration is far more complex within the confinement of a porous medium. A bubble
population in disequilibrium no longer evolves toward a single bubble, but toward another population with
different bubble volumes V b and uniform curvature κ. This is because confinement exerts first-order control
on κ, rendering it a non-monotonic function of V b —not so for spherical bubbles. Subsequent advances in
pore-scale modeling [21–24], microfluidic experiments [25, 26], and in-situ X-ray µCT observations [27–29]
have provided further evidence of ripening in complex microstructures, shed insight into controlling factors
(e.g., pore-size distribution, wettability, initial condition), and enabled higher-fidelity simulations. Theories
developed for single-component ripening fall into two categories: pore-scale and continuum. Continuum
theories [26, 30, 31] describe how trapped-bubble saturation evolves due to gradients in κ or capillary pressure
Pc at large scales. They have been used to assess the timescale and trajectory of bubble redistribution due
to gravity and geothermal gradients [32–35]. Crucially, continuum theories assume local equilibrium within
each representative elementary volume (REV). Pore-scale theories, by contrast, can capture the kinetics
prior to local equilibrium and predict population statistics of bubbles, providing far more detail than a single
aggregate quantity like saturation. The present work focuses on developing a pore-scale theory.
   Pore-scale theories build upon the seminal works by Lifshitz & Slyozov [9] and Wagner [10] (LSW) for
single-component bubbles in bulk fluids. The idea is to introduce a bubble number-density function g(R)
that describes the statistical distribution of bubble radii R and evolve it with a population balance equation:

                                              ∂g    ∂    dR
                                                 +    (g    )=0                                              (1)
                                              ∂t   ∂R dt

Here, dR/dt is the rate of change of radius for bubbles with radius R, which we refer to as the phase velocity
(i.e., velocity in the 1D statistical space of R). It is computed by assuming each bubble interacts with a mean
field that represents the rest of the population. For bubbles with radius R, the phase velocity reads:

                                      dR  1           1 1   1
                                         ∝ (xmf − x) ∝ (   − )                                               (2)
                                      dt  R           R Rc  R

                                                       2
where x is the dissolved concentration next to the R-bubble and xmf is the mean-field concentration. Since x
is proportional to κ (or Pc ) by Henry’s law, and κ ∝ 1/R by Young-Laplace for spherical bubbles, the second
proportionality in Eq.2 follows. Note xmf ∝ 1/Rc , where Rc is the critical radius below which bubbles shrink
and above which they grow. Rc is a property of the mean field and equals the average radius of all bubbles
in the population, obtained by imposing mass conservation on the total mass of bubbles. The factor 1/R can
be viewed as the “distance” of the mean field from an R-bubble. LSW further showed that g(R) approaches
a self-similar regime described by g(R) = Rc−4 f (R/Rc ), where f (·) is a complicated function.
   The first extension of LSW theory to porous media was proposed by Yu et al. [36], under the assumption
that trapped bubbles remain spherical throughout ripening. Therefore, the only difference from bulk fluids is
that the pore network topology imposes a fixed distance across which bubbles interact. When this distance,
l, is set to some multiple of the throat length lt , Eq.2 becomes:

                                           dR  1           1 1    1
                                              ∝ (xmf − x) ∝ (    − )                                                      (3)
                                           dt  lt          lt Rc  R

although l continuously grows with time as bubbles dissolve and disappear. Yu and co-workers derived similar
self-similar solutions for g(R) and showed that Rc is now the harmonic average of all R in the population
(again obtained by imposing mass conservation). Note that since bubble deformation by porous confinement
is neglected, pore sizes Rp do not factor into this theory, making it best suited for homogeneous pore networks.
   Bueno et al. [37] formulated the first theory accounting for bubble deformation, pore-size heterogeneity,
and spatial correlation. The extension was non-trivial because it required defining the bubble number-density
g(s) in a 2D statistical space, where each bubble state s = (Rp , S b ) has two coordinates: size of the occupied
pore Rp and volume fraction of the pore occupied S b (bubble saturation). This required expressing Eq.1 as:

                                        ∂g   ∂    dRp,s  ∂     dS b
                                                              (g s ) = 0
                                                       
                                           +  (g ) +    b
                                                                                                                          (4)
                                        ∂t ∂Rp    dt    ∂S      dt

where dRp /dt = 0 was assumed, entailing bubbles, once trapped in a pore, remain there forever or dissolve—
they do not mobilize due to flow or capillarity. The phase velocity dSsb /dt for a bubble at state s is:

                                                   dSsb    1
                                                        ∝ 3 (κmf  − κs )                                                  (5)
                                                    dt   R p lt s

where κs denotes the curvature of the s-bubble and κmf
                                                    s  is that of its mean field. Notice each s has its own
mean-field curvature, and that bubble radius R no longer enters the formulation because it is ill-defined for
a deformed bubble. Instead, κ is used, which is a U-shaped function of S b (bubbles are spherical at low S b
and deformed at high S b ). To understand Eq.5, note the left-hand side is proportional to dVsb /dt, where Vsb
                                 3
denotes bubble volume and Vsb ∝ Rp,s Ssb . To account for spatial correlations in Rp , the κmf
                                                                                            s  was defined by:1
                                   Z
                                                  ′                                 ′
                           κmf
                             s   ∝           p(S b |Rp′ ; t) p(Rp′ |Rp ; t) κs′ dS b dRp′                   (6)
                                            ′ ,S b ′
                                           Rp



  1 We have simplified this and following expressions by assuming uniform throat size across the network. See Eq.17 in [37].




                                                             3
involving conditional probabilities:

                                         g(Rp′ ; t)                         ′                  ′
                      p(Rp′ |Rp ; t) ∝              p(Rp′ |Rp ; 0) ,   p(S b |Rp′ ; t) ∝ g(S b |Rp′ ; t)         (7)
                                         g(Rp′ ; 0)

The details of how these were derived are not important here. What matters is p(Rp′ |Rp ; t), the probability
that a bubble residing at a pore of size Rp interacts with one at a pore of size Rp′ , is proportional to its initial
condition at t = 0. Bueno and co-workers assumed that an s-bubble interacts only with its nearest neighbors,
thereby neglecting interactions with distant bubbles. Hence, if two bubble groups reside in mutually distant
pore sizes Rp and Rp′ such that p(Rp′ |Rp ; 0) = 0, then the clusters evolve independently, unaware of each
other’s presence. This shortcoming was highlighted as a challenge in [37] for future theories to overcome. We
also note that this theory did not conserve total bubble mass for networks with correlated pore size.
   All above theories are for single-component bubbles. The only theoretical work on multicomponent
bubbles trapped in porous media is that of Bueno et al. [38], who successfully described g(s) at equilibrium,
now defined in a 3D statistical space s = (Rp , S b , y) where y is the mole fraction of bubbles. The kinetics, or
timescale to reach equilibrium, could not be estimated. This theory built on an earlier equilibrium theory
for single component bubbles by Mehmani & Xu [20], where the statistical space was 2D with s = (Rp , S b ).
   In this work, we generalize the single-component kinetic theory of [37] to multicomponent bubble popula-
tions trapped in porous media with heterogeneous and spatially correlated pore sizes. The proposed theory
also addresses the challenge of remote-bubble interactions, ensures total bubble-mass conservation through
provable theorems, and features a simpler formulation, making it superior to [37]. We systematically validate
our theory against the pore-network model (PNM) of [38] across 19 cases spanning homogeneous, hetero-
geneous, correlated, and uncorrelated networks with different bubble populations relevant to UHS. Good
agreement is observed throughout. Pending challenges and limitations are discussed subsequently.
   The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the problem we aim to solve, its conceptualization,
and assumptions. Section 3 briefly reviews the PNM of [38] used to validate our theory. Section 4 details
the theory’s formulation. Section 5 discusses the validation test cases, and Section 6 presents the results. We
discuss key limitations and implications for UHS in Section 7 and summarize main findings in Section 8.


2. Problem description

   We consider a porous medium with a rigid microstructure, as shown in Fig.1. The void space is con-
ceptualized as a pore network, a computational graph consisting of nodes (or pores) and links (or throats).
Pores provide storage volume for fluids, while throats impose mass-transfer resistance between them. Pore
and throat sizes may be homogeneous or heterogeneous, and spatially correlated or uncorrelated. We as-
sume the void space is occupied by a perfectly wetting (zero contact angle) liquid, and some pores contain
a compressible gaseous bubble. The gas consists of two components that are partially soluble in the wetting
phase. For concreteness, and without loss of generality, we consider bubbles to be binary mixtures of H2 and
CO2 immersed in water as the wetting phase. The gas is assumed to be ideal and devoid of H2 O, and the


                                                                4
dissolved fractions of H2 and CO2 in water to be dilute. Bubbles exchange mass through Ostwald ripening,
where concentration gradients of dissolved species drive Fickian diffusion. Such gradients exist because of
differences in the species concentrations surrounding each bubble, which are dictated by the composition and
curvature of each bubble. We assume each bubble occupies only one pore, and that pore shapes (but not
sizes) are identical throughout the network. Lastly, we assume the interfacial tension between liquid and
gas is not altered by bubble composition or dissolved concentrations. Our goal is to develop a theory that
predicts the temporal evolution of bubble statistics, including composition, volume, and occupied-pore size.




Figure 1: The porous microstructure is composed of a solid matrix and an interconnected void space. We conceptualize the void
as a pore network, a computational graph that consists of nodes (pores) and links (throats). All pores contain a wetting phase
(H2 O), and some are occupied by partially miscible, two-component (CO2 and H2 ) gaseous bubbles. Bubbles are confined to
one pore and exchange mass via Ostwald ripening, driven by concentration gradients of dissolved species around each bubble.




3. Pore-network modeling

    We briefly review the pore-network model (PNM) of Bueno et al.[38], which we use to validate our theory
for multicomponent Ostwald ripening. The two share many of the same equations. The governing equations
of the PNM consist of a mass balance imposed at each pore i and for each species α:
                                              zi              zi
                                     dnα,i   X               X   Aij
                                           =     Jij = Dα ρw         (xα,j − xα,i )                                       (8)
                                      dt     j=1
                                                                 L
                                                             j=1 ij

The variables nα,i , Jij , and zi denote the number of moles of species α in pore i, the diffusive flux (mol/s)
from neighboring pore j to pore i, and the number of pores connected to pore i by a throat, respectively.
To the right of the second equality, Dα is the molecular diffusion coefficient, ρw the molar density of water,
and xα,i the mole fraction of species α dissolved in the wetting phase within pore i. The Aij and Lij are the
cross-sectional area and length of the throat connecting pores i and j, through which species diffuse.
    To transform Eq.8 into a system of ordinary differential equations (ODEs) in terms of the unknown xα,i ,
we need constitutive relations expressing nα,i in terms of xα,i . The first such relation is nα,i = yα,i ρbi Vib +


                                                              5
xα,i ρw (Vp,i − Vib ), provided pore i is occupied by a gaseous bubble. The first term accounts for moles of α in
the bubble, and the second term for dissolved moles in the wetting phase. Here, Vp,i , Vib , ρbi , and yα,i are the
pore volume, bubble volume, gas molar density, and mole fraction of α in the gas, respectively. If pore i is
vacant, then Vib = 0 and the expression simplifies to nα,i = xα,i ρw Vp,i . Recall bubbles occupy only one pore.
   The second constitutive relation expresses yα,i in terms of xα,i by assuming each bubble is in local
equilibrium with dissolved species in its pore. Under the dilute-solution assumption (Section 2), equilibrium
takes the form of Henry’s law: xα,i Hα = yα,i Pib , where Hα is Henry’s constant and Pib the bubble pressure.
Pib is related to the wetting-phase pressure Pw through Young-Laplace: Pib = Pw + σκi , where σ is interfacial
tension and κi the bubble curvature in pore i. Since the wetting phase is stagnant (Section 2), Pw is constant.
   The third relation expresses ρbi in terms of Pib using the ideal-gas law Pib = ρbi RT , per our assumption
in Section 2. Here, R and T are the universal gas constant and absolute temperature, respectively. The
final constitutive equation we need relates κi to Vib . For a semi-cubic pore i, defined as one whose maximal
inscribed radius is Rp,i and volume satisfies Vp,i = (2Rp,i )3 , this relationship takes the form [21]:
                                                   1
                                           min   Vc,i 3
                                                                                          Vib < Vc,i
                                        
                                        
                                         κ
                                         i                                          if
                                                 Vib
                κi = κi (Vib , Vp,i ) =                                                                          (9)
                                                      Vib − Vc,i     Vib − Vc,i
                                                                              
                                           min
                                                                                          Vib ≥ Vc,i
                                        
                                        κi
                                                1+a              +b                 if
                                                      Vp,i − Vc,i    Vp,i − Vib
                3
where Vc,i = 4πRp,i /3 is the volume of the maximal inscribed sphere, and κmin
                                                                           i   = 2/Rp,i the corresponding
curvature. Eq.9 is non-monotonic, with κi attaining its minimum κmin
                                                                 i   at Vib = Vc,i . For Vib < Vc,i , the bubble
is small and spherical. For Vib ≥ Vc,i , it is large and deformed by the pore’s confinement. The parameters a
and b control this deformation and depend on pore shape (here a = 1 and b = 0.01). Following [38], we refer
to Vc,i as the critical volume, bubbles with Vib < Vc,i as sub-critical, and those with Vib > Vc,i as super-critical.
   The species balance Eq.8 combined with the above constitutive relations yields a system of nonlinear
ODEs, which we solve using a modified Newton scheme with adaptive time stepping [20]. The modification
avoids instabilities and divergence of Newton iterations near bubble disappearance events or when Vib crosses
the critical volume Vc,i , where the derivative dκi /dVib is discontinuous. We also refer the reader to [38] for a
lower bound on Vib , below which bubbles must be marked as “vanished” to prevent numerical instabilities.


4. Theory of two-component Ostwald ripening in porous media

4.1. Population balance formulation

   We formulate a kinetic theory that predicts the temporal evolution of the statistics of a bubble population
driven by two-component Ostwald ripening. The PNM of Section 3 models this evolution spatially, meaning
each bubble is tracked individually and assigned a spatial position, while interacting with neighboring bubbles
at other positions. In our theory, we do not track individual bubbles, but groups of bubbles sharing the same
statistical state, s. We let this state s = (Rp , S b , y1 ) consist of three coordinates in a three-dimensional
statistical space, referred to as the phase space. The first coordinate is the pore size Rp that bubbles at state


                                                          6
Figure 2: (a) Schematic of 3D phase space used to describe bubble statistics by the number-density function g(s; t). Each point
in this space is a bubble state s with three coordinates Rp , S b , and y1 . The number of bubbles within an infinitesimal volume dΩ
centered at s equals g(s; t) dΩ. The gray cloud denotes g(s; t) and the contours its 2D marginals projected onto the coordinate
planes. (b) Schematic of a bubble at state s interacting with the rest of the population, conceptualized as a mean field.



s occupy. The second is bubble saturation S b = V b /Vp , which denotes the volume fraction of the host pore
each bubble in the group occupies. The third coordinate is the mole fraction of H2 for each bubble in the
group, denoted by y1 . Since bubbles are binary mixtures, the mole fraction of CO2 follows from y2 = 1 − y1 .
    To quantify the number of bubbles in each state s at any given time t, we introduce the number-density
function (NDF) g(s; t). Concretely, the number of bubbles in an infinitesimal volume of phase space dΩ =
dRp dS b dy1 centered at s equals g(s; t) dΩ. Figs.2-3 illustrate this conceptualization. Fig.2a depicts the 3D
phase space with g(s; t) visualized as a cloud, along with its projections (or marginals) onto the coordinate
planes. Fig.3 provides a simple example of how spatial information in the PNM is translated into statistical
information in the theory. The left panel is a schematic of pure H2 (cyan; y1 = 1) and CO2 (red; y1 = 0)
bubbles residing in pores of different sizes (Rp ) with different saturations (S b ). The remaining three panels
visualize 2D projections of the corresponding g(s; t) onto the coordinate planes. Bubbles from the spatial
picture are overlain on the phase-space plots to highlight which part of g(s; t) they represent. Pure-species
bubbles (y1 = 0 or 1) are used for simplicity, as bubbles are generally mixtures with arbitrary mole fraction
(y1 ∈ [0, 1]). The shadows on each plot represent 2D marginals of g(s; t), and the pink curves along the axes
represent 1D marginals. The goal of our theory is to predict the temporal evolution of g(s; t).
    We describe the evolution of g(s; t) in time with the following population balance equation:

                   ∂g                               ∂g    ∂                ∂              ∂
                      + ∇ · (g u) = 0        ⇒         +    b
                                                              (g uS b ) +     (g uy1 ) +     (g uRp ) = 0                      (10)
                   ∂t                               ∂t   ∂S               ∂y1            ∂Rp
                                    dR       bdy1
where u = (uRp , uS b , uy1 ) = ( dtp , dS
                                         dt , dt ) is the velocity that advects g(s; t) through phase space. This

velocity is determined purely by the physics of Ostwald ripening for a population of gaseous bubbles composed
of two components (here H2 and CO2 ). We assume uRp = 0, implying that bubbles cannot change pore sizes



                                                                 7
Figure 3: (Left panel) Schematic of spatial arrangement of bubbles in a pore network. H2 bubbles are colored in cyan and CO2
bubbles in red. (Three rightmost panels) Translation of spatial information in the pore network into statistical information in
the theory. The three panels show projections of the number-density function g(s; t) onto the 2D coordinate planes of the 3D
phase space (Fig.2). Bubbles from the first panel are annotated on these phase-space plots to emphasize which part of g(s; t)
they represent. Shadows represent 2D marginals of g(s; t), and pink curves along the right/bottom axes the 1D marginals.



by, for example, mobilizing from one pore to the next due to background flow or capillary action.2 This is
consistent with our assumption in Section 2 that each bubble occupies only one pore and the wetting phase
is stagnant (i.e., no flow). Computing u = (0, uS b , uy1 ) closes the theory, which we address in Section 4.2.
    Given some initial condition (IC), g(s; t = 0), solving Eq.10 requires boundary conditions (BCs). Since
we have assumed uRp = 0, no BCs are needed at Rp = 0 or Rp = Rpmax , where Rpmax is the maximum pore size
in the network. At y1 = 0 and y1 = 1, the normal velocity uy1 always points toward the interior of the phase
space, preventing bubbles from ever crossing either boundary. Otherwise, mole fractions would fall outside
the valid interval [0, 1]. To also prevent new bubbles from being introduced (or “injected”), we set g = 0, or
equivalently uy1 = 0, at y1 = 0 and y1 = 1. Following similar arguments, we set g = 0, or equivalently uS b = 0,
at S b = 1. The only tricky boundary is S b = 0, because shrinking bubbles during ripening can indeed vanish
and leave the phase space, in which case uS b < 0 holds. Since Eq.10 is first-order hyperbolic, no BC is needed
at such outflow portions of the boundary—numerically, the upwind value of g gets used. If, however, uS b > 0
holds, then we set g = 0 at such inflow portions to prevent introducing new bubbles into the population.


4.2. Closure by mean-field approximation

    To determine the phase-space velocity u, we must compute dS b /dt and dy1 /dt. We adopt a mean-field
approximation that reduces the problem of a bubble interacting with multiple neighboring bubbles to the
simpler problem of interaction with a single entity: the mean field. Consider a bubble at state s = (Rp , S b , y1 ),
as shown in Fig.2b, that exchanges mass with surrounding bubbles. On average, its nearest neighbors lie
a distance ls away. We therefore idealize the region r < ls as bubble-free, which is a disk/sphere of radius
r = ls in 2D/3D. All bubbles in r > ls define the mean field, to which average properties are assigned, such as
dissolved concentration xmf                      b mf                       mf
                         α,s , bubble pressure (P )s , and gas composition yα,s . Mean-field properties are



  2 One consequence of u                                                                             b
                        Rp = 0 is that Eq.10 reduces to a series of 2D PDEs in the variables y1 and S for each fixed Rp .



                                                              8
computed from g(s; t), as shown later. Since bubbles can vanish during ripening, ls grows with time. For
tractability, we assume the bubble-spacing parameter ls depends primarily on the pore-size coordinate Rp ,
with S b and y1 playing secondary roles. This is reasonable because spatial correlations in Rp dictate where
bubbles are initially trapped in the network (e.g., by cyclic injections of H2 ) and how curvature-driven mass
transfer evolves. We therefore write lR hereafter to make this dependence explicit (Fig.2). Note the mean-field
approximation requires a sufficiently large bubble population for ensemble statistics to have converged.
   We now derive expressions for dSsb /dt and dy1,s /dt. To compute mass exchange between the s-bubble and
the mean field (Fig.2b), we idealize transport in the wetting phase as radial diffusion toward a spherical (3D)
or cylindrical (2D) surface at r = l0 , representing the bubble’s interface (specified later). The annular region
from r = l0 to lR is bubble-free, with mass transfer governed by Fick’s second law in radial coordinates:

                                                   1   d                   dxα
                        0 = ∇ · (Dαe ρw ∇xα ) =             (rd−1 Dαe ρw       )   ∀r ∈ (l0 , lR )             (11)
                                                  rd−1 dr                   dr

Eq.11 assumes steady-state, radially symmetric transport, implying the wetting phase acts merely as a solute
transport medium, not storage. Here, d is the network dimension (2 or 3), and Dαe = Dα ϕa /τ the restricted
diffusion coefficient, which depends on molecular diffusivity Dα , tortuosity τ , and areal porosity ϕa . Appendix
A shows ϕa = CAt /lt , with C = z/(2h) in 2D and C = z/(2lt ) in 3D. Here, z is the mean coordination number
(neighbor count) of pores, h the network’s out-of-plane thickness in 2D, and At and lt are the mean cross-
sectional area and length of throats. Solving Eq.11 with BCs xα (l0 ) = xα,s and xα (lR ) = xmf
                                                                                             α,s yields:
                                                                  
                                                                   ln(r/l0 )
                                                                  
                                                                                   in 2D
                                                                    ln(lR /l0 )
                               xα (r) = xα,s + (xmf
                                                 α,s − xα,s ) ·                                                (12)
                                                                   1/r−1/l0
                                                                  
                                                                                   in 3D
                                                                    1/lR −1/l0

Recall xα,s is the dissolved concentration at the interface of the s-bubble.
   Given Eq.12, we write a mole balance for the bubble at state s:
                                                               
                                             Dα ϕa dxα (r) 2πrh in 2D
                                                               
                            dnα,s
                                  = −jA =         ρw         ·                                                 (13)
                             dt                τ       dr      4πr2 in 3D
                                                               


where j is the molar flux of dissolved solute toward/away from the s-bubble, and A the surface area of the
cylinder/sphere through which transport occurs. Note the product jA does not depend on r. Differentiating
Eq.12 with respect to r and substituting into Eq.13, along with the expression for ϕa above, yields:
                                                             
                                                              2π
                          dnα,s           At mf          C  ln(lR /l0 )      in 2D
                                = Dα ρw (xα,s − xα,s ) ·                                                       (14)
                            dt            lt             τ          4π
                                                             
                                                               lt /l0 −lt /lR in 3D

   We next relate dnα,s /dt to dSsb /dt and dy1,s /dt. Following Section 3, the number of moles in the s-bubble
is nα,s = yα,s ρbs Ssb Vp,s , where all variables retain their original meaning, except the pore index i is now
replaced with the bubble state coordinate s. Invoking the same constitutive equations in Section 3, it is
straightforward to see nα,s is fully determined by s = (Rp , S b , y1 ). Recall these constitutive equations include


                                                           9
the ideal-gas law ρbs RT = Psb , the Young-Laplace equation Psb = Pw + σκs (with Pw assumed constant), and
the curvature-volume relation κs (Vsb , Vp,s ) in Eq.9 for the pore size Rp occupied by the s-bubble. As a result,
the time derivative of nα,s = nα,s (Rp , S b , y1 ) can be expanded using the chain rule:
                             dnα,s    ∂nα,s dRp,s
                                               
                                                 ∂nα,s dSsb    ∂nα,s dyα,s
                                   = (  )  +(    b
                                                       )     +(      )                                         (15a)
                              dt     ∂Rp,s dt     ∂Ss dt       ∂yα,s dt
                           ∂nα,s                b   Ssb dκs     ∂nα,s
                               b
                                  = yα,s Vp,s (ρs +    σ b ),         = Vp,s ρbs Ssb                 (15b)
                            ∂S                      RT dSs       ∂yα
where the first term in Eq.15a is zero since dRp,s /dt = 0 was assumed in Section 4.1. Eq.15b follows from
substituting the above constitutive relations into the remaining two terms in Eq.15a and simplifying.
   We now substitute Eq.15 into the left-hand side (LHS) of Eq.14, which results in two equations corre-
sponding to α ∈ {1, 2}. To express this 2×2 ODE system in terms of only Ssb and y1,s as our primary variables,
we use Henry’s law xα,s = yα,s Psb /Hα to replace xα,s on the right-hand side (RHS) of Eq.14. This yields:
                                        Ssb dκs
                                                    
                                                         dS b
                                                                                                            
                 b b                b                                        D1
          Vp,s ρs Ss y1,s Vp,s (ρs + RT σ dS b )  
                                                                                        b mf          b
                                                                             H1 ((y 1 P  )s  − (y 1 P   ) s )
                                               s   dt      = ρw At Gs                                   
                                                                                                                (16a)
                                                                     l
                                          b
                                                                                                            
          
                 b b                  b  S s   dκ s
                                                       dy 1
                                                                      t     D2         b mf          b
           Vp,s ρs Ss −y2,s Vp,s (ρs +       σ      )                        H2 ((y2 P )s    − (y2 P )s )
                                        RT dSsb           dt
where                                              
                                                    2π
                                               C  ln(lR /l0 )          in 2D
                                          Gs =   ·                                                             (16b)
                                               τ       4π
                                                   
                                                       lt /l0 −lt /lR   in 3D
In Eq.16a, we have used dy2 /dt = −dy1 /dt, which holds for binary mixtures.
   Right-multiplying both sides of Eq.16a by the inverse of the mass matrix on the LHS, we obtain:
                                              −1          2
                   dSsb               S b dκs
                               
                           1                             X    Dα
                                 ρbs + s σ b                      (yα P b )mf − (yα P b )s
                                                                                           
                        =                          ρw Gs                   s                       (17a)
                    dt    Vp,s        RT dSs             α=1
                                                              Hα
                                                2
                    dy1,s    1    b b −1
                                               X                Dα
                                                                    (yα P b )mf − (yα P b )s
                                                                                            
                          =      ρ S     ρw Gs    (δ1α − y1,s )                                                (17b)
                     dt     Vp,s s s           α=1
                                                                H α
                                                                             s


which are explicit expressions for dSsb /dt and dy1,s /dt as intended. The Kronecker delta δ1α assumes a value
of one for α = 1 and zero for α = 2. We note (yα P b )mf    mf    b mf
                                                      s ̸= yα,s (P )s  and that (yα P b )mf   mf
                                                                                         s = xα,s /Hα holds by

Henry’s law. The latter implies that the solution of Eq.17 at large t asymptotes as xα,s → xmf
                                                                                            α,s for all α and

s. Unfortunately, the mathematical form of Eq.17 is numerically problematic when the population balance
Eq.10 is solved with an Eulerian (grid-based) method, as done here with finite volumes: the curves dSsb /dt = 0
and dy1,s /dt = 0 form a narrowing corridor in phase space that traps bubbles before they reach equilibrium
(see Appendix B for details). An additional problem is that each state s interacts with a different mean-field
xmf
 α,s , and there is nothing in the expressions provided later that forces these mean-fields to converge to the

same state at t → ∞. To address these challenges, we alter the driving force in Eq.17b as follows:
                                                    −1        2
                    dSsb                   Ssb dκs
                                
                            1      b
                                                              X   Dα
                                                                       (yα P b )mf − yα,s Psb
                                                                                              
                         =       ρs +          σ        ρw Gs                   s                              (18a)
                     dt    Vp,s           RT dSsb             α=1
                                                                  H α
                                                                      
                    dy1,s    1              −1             D1       D2
                                  ρbs Ssb                                (y1mf − y1,s )
                                          
                          =                    Pw ρw Gs y2     + y1                                            (18b)
                     dt     Vp,s                           H1       H2


                                                         10
   Eq.18 constitutes our final expressions for dSsb /dt and dy1,s /dt. Notice the RHS of Eq.18b is now driven
by the difference between the s-bubble composition, y1,s , and the mean field, y1mf . Crucially, y1mf does not
depend on s, ensuring all bubbles approach the same composition at t → ∞. We prove in Section 4.4 that
because our theory conserves mole exchange between bubbles, y1mf → y1mix at large t, where y1mix is the bulk
(or mixture) composition of all bubbles in the population. Therefore, bubbles are guaranteed to converge
                                                                                                        mf
to a physically meaningful equilibrium composition. Notice Eq.18 drives xα,s and y1,s towards xmf
                                                                                               α,s and y1

for all s. To derive Eq.18b, we have assumed Pw ≫ σκs for all s, which is valid for high-pressure subsurface
environments (e.g., UHS). This allows setting P b ≈ Pw and pulling it out of the summation in Eq.17b. We
caution that applying the same simplification to Eq.17a as well would be fatal, as the ODE system would
then be driven solely by differences in bubble composition (i.e., y1mf − y1,s ), not curvature.
   We close this section by returning to the inner radius l0 in Eq.12 and deriving an expression for it. Notice
the smallest lR can be is a single throat length lt , corresponding to when all neighboring pores of the s-bubble
are occupied by bubbles. Since there are z such neighbors, we can write analogously to Eq.8 in the PNM:

                          dnα,s         zAt                            zAt mf
                                = Dα ρw     (xα (lt ) − xα,s ) = Dα ρw     (xα,s − xα,s )                     (19)
                           dt            lt                             lt

The first equality follows from Eq.8, where by radial symmetry the dissolved concentration within all neigh-
boring pores is xα (lt ). The second equality follows from substituting for xα (lt ) the expression from Eq.12
with r = lR = lt . Comparing Eq.19 to Eq.14, we arrive at the following formula for l0 :
                                                 
                                                 e− 2πC
                                                     zτ         in 2D
                                       l0 = lt ·                                                              (20)
                                                 (1 + 4πC )−1 in 3D
                                                 
                                                         zτ

This, in turn, yields the expression below for the geometric factor Gs from Eq.16b:
                                                        
                                            1      τ    2 ln lR
                                                        
                                                                    in 2D
                                      −1                      lt
                                     Gs = +           ·                                                       (21)
                                            z    4πC   (1 − lt ) in 3D
                                                               lR

Note Gs = z when lR = lt , which holds for a densely bubble-occupied network, and it decreases with lR . In
summary, the closure equations from this section are Eqs.18 and 21. To complete the theory, we now need
expressions that allow us to compute (yα P b )mf
                                              s  and y1mf at any given time t. This is addressed next.

4.3. Computing mean-field properties

   In this section, we postulate explicit expressions for (yα P b )mf
                                                                   s  and y1mf . We begin with (yα P b )mf
                                                                                                        s  and
propose the following, which accounts for potential spatial correlations in pore size Rp in the network:

                                                        p(s′ , l|s)                         p(s′ , l|s)
                                    Z                                                Z
                                 −1                                       ′     −1
                 (yα P b )mf
                          s  = ls          (yα P b
                                                   )s ′             dl ds   , ls   =                    dl ds′ (22)
                                     s′ ,l                  l                         s′ ,l     l

The p(s′ , l|s) is the conditional probability density function (PDF) of finding a bubble at state s′ a distance l
from the bubble at state s (see Fig.2b). Eq.22 is essentially a weighted average of (yα P b )s′ , where the weights
p(s′ , l|s) / l decline with distance from the s-bubble according to spatial correlations in bubble states.


                                                        11
   To compute p(s′ , l|s), we first apply Bayes’ theorem:

                                                           p(s′ , l|s) = p(l|s′ , s) p(s′ |s)                                       (23)

and set p(l|s′ , s) = δ(l − lss′ ), where δ(·) is the Dirac delta function. This expression for p(l|s′ , s) is consistent
with our theory’s conceptualization in Fig.2b, meaning that once s and s′ are chosen, the interaction distance
between them is fixed at lss′ . Recall the space between bubbles s and s′ is free of other bubbles. To estimate
p(s′ |s) and lss′ , we assume much of the spatial correlation in bubble states is dictated pore size (i.e., the Rp
coordinate of s). This justifies renaming lss′ to lRR′ (Fig.3b) and approximating p(s′ |s) as follows:

                                                               ′                                   ′
                      p(s′ |s) ≈ p(s′ |Rp ) = p(S b , y1′ |Rp′ , Rp ) p(Rp′ |Rp ) ≈ p(S b , y1′ |Rp′ ) p(Rp′ |Rp )                  (24)

where the second equality follows from expanding s′ in terms of its coordinates and applying Bayes’ theorem.
   The first PDF on the RHS of Eq.24 can be computed exactly from the NDF g(s′ ; t) as follows:
                                                                 Z
                            ′                          ′                            ′                  ′
                       p(S b , y1′ |Rp′ ) = g(Rp′ , S b , y1′ ) /        g(Rp′ , S b , y1′ ) dy1′ dS b                              (25)
                                                                   b ′ ′
                                              | {z }              S ,y1
                                                                   s′

where t is suppressed for brevity. The second PDF on the RHS of Eq.24 is approximated as:
                                                             Z
                            ′             ′
                         p(Rp |Rp ) ≃ f (Rp |Rp ; lRR ) FR /
                                                     ′    ′    f (Rp′ |Rp ; lRR′ ) FR′ dRp′                                         (26)
                                                                                   ′
                                                                                  Rp

where f (Rp′ , Rp ; l) is the joint PDF of pore sizes Rp′ and Rp separated by a distance l. This PDF describes
the pore network itself (not bubble occupancy) and is assumed to be known; it can be computed from X-
ray images of porous samples. The smaller the distance l, the larger the value of f (Rp′ , Rp ; l). The marginal
f (Rp ) = f (Rp′ , Rp ; l) dRp′ is the pore-size distribution. For uncorrelated networks, f (Rp′ , Rp ; l) = f (Rp′ )f (Rp )
         R

for all l. The factor FR′ represents the fraction of bubble-occupied pores in the network that have sizes
between Rp′ and Rp′ +δRp′ . Its multiplication by f (Rp′ |Rp ; lRR′ ) accounts for bubble occupancy, since p(Rp′ |Rp )
represents the probability of two bubble-occupied pores interacting (not just any two pores). The denominator
in Eq.26 ensures p(Rp′ |Rp ) integrates to one. FR′ can be computed exactly from g(s′ ; t) and f (Rp′ ) as follows:

                       nb ′
                                           Z
                                                                  ′                    ′
               FR′ = pR , nbR′ = δRp′                  g(Rp′ , S b , y1′ ; t) dy1′ dS b , npR′ = np f (Rp′ ) δRp′ (27)
                       nR ′                 S b ′ ,y1′

where np denotes the total number of pores in the network.
   Substituting Eqs.23-24 into Eq.22, and relabeling the variables lss′ and ls as lRR′ and lR to explicitly
signal our assumption that they depend solely on correlations in Rp (not S b or y1 ), we obtain:
                                                           ′
                                                      p(S b , y1′ |Rp′ ) p(Rp′ |Rp ) ′ b ′ ′                      p(R′ |R; lRR′ ) ′
                      Z                                                                                        Z
                 −1                                                                                     −1
  (yα P b )mf
           s  = lR                      (yα P b )s′                                 dy1 dS dRp ,       lR  =                     dRp (28)
                        ′ ,S b ′ ,y ′
                       Rp          1
                                                                   lRR′                                         ′
                                                                                                               Rp     lRR′

                                                     ′   ′         ′′
as the final expression for (yα P b )mf          b
                                     s , with p(S , y1 |Rp ) and p(Rp |Rp ) evaluated from Eqs.25-27.

   The bubble spacing lRR′ in Eq.28 grows as bubbles dissolve during ripening. To compute it, we propose:
                                                                                dRR′
                                                                       lRR′ =    1/d
                                                                                                                                    (29)
                                                                                FR′

                                                                           12
where dRR′ is the average distance of pores with size Rp from their nearest pore with size Rp′ . Thus, dRR′ is a
property of the network itself (not bubble occupancy). For most networks, dRR′ ≈ lt is a good approximation,
but more accurate values can be computed from an X-ray image. Recall d is the network dimension and FR′
is given by Eq.27. While empirical, Eq.29 has a few desirable properties. In homogeneous networks, where
                                                                                   1/d
Rp assumes a single value (Rp′ = Rp ), Eq.29 reduces to lRR = L/nb , because dRR = lt and FR = nb /np ,
                                                                1/d
where nb is the total number of bubbles and L = lt np                 is the spacing between bubbles if spread uniformly
across the network. In heterogeneous networks, when all pores of size Rp′ are bubble-occupied, lRR′ = dRR′
as expected. As bubbles dissolve due to ripening, FR′ decreases from one to zero, causing lRR′ to increase.
In Appendix C, we compare lRR′ computed from Eq.29 with direct PNM simulations and find acceptable
agreement in heterogeneous networks with both correlated and uncorrelated pore sizes.3
                                                                                  mf
    Having formulated (yα P b )mf
                               s , we now postulate the following expression for y1 :
                                           Z                 Z
                                     y1mf = y1,s g(s; t) ds / g(s; t) ds                                                   (30)
                                                      s                    s

which is the average of y1,s over all bubbles in the population. Notice y1mf does not depend on s, which forces
all bubbles to converge to the same equilibrium composition and avoids the numerical difficulty discussed in
Section 4.2. While Eq.30 does not account for spatial correlations in Rp , they are indirectly captured through
(yα P b )mf
         s  and the coupling between ODEs in Eq.18. The next section addresses the issue of species-mass
conservation among bubbles and shows that both (yα P b )mf
                                                        s  and y1mf must be corrected to honor it.

4.4. Mass conservation

    As a bubble population described by g(s; t) evolves due to Ostwald ripening, the number of moles of each
species must be conserved. Specifically, moles leaving one bubble must enter another, keeping the total moles
of each species constant. Recall the wetting phase in our theory has no storage capacity for dissolved solute.
In Appendix D, we prove the theorem below, establishing a condition equivalent to mass conservation:

Theorem 1. The following two expressions are equivalent, where Ω is the entire phase space:
                 dntot
                            Z                                 Z
                    α     d                                      dnα,s
                       =       nα,s g(s; t) ds = 0    ⇔                g(s; t) ds = 0                                      (31)
                   dt     dt Ω                                 Ω dt

In words, the left expression states that the total number of moles of species α is constant for all t.

    Setting α = 1 and substituting Eq.15 for dn1,s /dt into the rightmost expression in Theorem 1, with dSsb /dt
and dy1,s /dt given by Eq.18, we obtain:
                                                                                           
  Z                2
                  X   D β                                        D 1      D2
                           (yβ P b )mf − yβ,s Psb + Pw ρw Gs (y2             )(y mf − y1,s ) g(s; t) ds = 0
                                                 
      y1,s ρw Gs                   s                                + y1                                                  (32)
    Ω                 Hβ                                         H1       H2 1
                     β=1



   3 We make two technical remarks about l
                                             RR′ : (1) Eq.29 ignores any dependence on FR , the bubble occupancy of pores with

size Rp . Hence, it lacks the necessary symmetry to be considered a “distance metric” for bubble spacing; (2) For all choices of
Rp and Rp′ , the inequality lRR′ ≥ lt > l0 holds as can be verified from Eqs.20 and 29 and the fact that dRR′ ≥ lt .


                                                                13
Unfortunately, the (yα P b )mf
                            s  and y1mf postulated by Eqs.28 and 30 in the previous section do not guarantee
that Eq.32 is satisfied. Therefore, a correction to these mean-field properties is needed to conserve bubble
mass. We propose the following multiplicative corrections:

                                     (yα P b )mf,∗
                                              s    = λ (yα P b )mf
                                                                s ,               y1mf,∗ = γ y1mf                   (33)

where the asterisk indicates a corrected mean-field property.
   To compute the correction multiplier λ, we write an equation similar to Eq.32 for α = 2, add it to Eq.32,
use the fact that y1,s + y2,s = 1 and y1mf + y2mf = 1, and substitute the corrected mean-field properties in
Eq.33 into the resulting expression. After some algebra, this yields:
                           Z         2                                  Z        2
                                     X Dβ                                        X Dβ
                      λ=        Gs              yβ,s Psb g(s; t) ds /       Gs              (yβ P b )mf
                                                                                                     s g(s; t) ds   (34)
                            Ω              Hβ                           Ω              Hβ
                                     β=1                                         β=1

Given λ from Eq.34, we can compute the second correction multiplier γ by substituting the corrected mean-
field properties in Eq.33 into Eq.32 and solving for γ. This yields:
                                                                                               
          Z                                                   2
                            D 1      D 2
                                                             X   Dβ
                                                                      λ (yβ P b )mf − yβ,s Psb  g(s; t) ds /
                                                                                              
      γ=     Pw ρw Gs (y2      + y1     ) y1,s − y1,s ρw Gs                     s
           Ω                H1       H2                          Hβ
                                                             β=1                                                    (35)
                                                            Z                                    
                                                                              D1        D2 mf
                                                                 Pw ρw Gs (y2      + y1    ) y1     g(s; t) ds
                                                              Ω               H1        H2

To summarize, we first compute the uncorrected mean-field properties (yα P b )mf
                                                                              s  and y1mf via Eqs.28 and 30,
then correct them via Eqs.33-35. These corrected mean-field properties are used in Eq.18 to compute the
phase-space velocities dSsb /dt and dy1,s /dt needed in the population balance equation Eq.10.
   We close this section with a corollary to Theorem 1, which guarantees that bubbles converge to a physically
meaningful equilibrium composition. The proof is provided in Appendix E.

Corollary 1. The bulk (or mixture) composition of all bubbles in the population, defined as:
                                      Z                        Z                                    2
                                                                                                    X
                           y1mix =         y1,s ns g(s; t) ds / ns g(s; t) ds ,              ns =         nα,s      (36)
                                       s                         s                                  α=1


remains constant for all t. Moreover, as t → ∞, the mean-field mole-fraction satisfies y1mf,∗ → y1mix .

This result further supports our choice of the s-independent y1mf in Eq.30 and the reformulation of dy1,s /dt
in Eq.18. By contrast, the precursor ODE in Eq.17 does not guarantee convergence to y1mix . In Appendix
E, we also show γ → 1 as t → ∞, implying y1mf → y1mix . Finally, we offer the following remark about λ:

Remark 1. While it is obvious that γ corrects the mean-field composition y1mf , the use of a single multiplier
λ for both species α ∈ {1, 2} is equivalent to correcting the mean-field bubble curvature κmf
                                                                                           s . To see this, note

the mean-field operator (·)mf
                           s  is linear, so by Henry’s law and the Young-Laplace equation H1 xmf        mf
                                                                                              1,s + H2 x2,s =

(y1 P b )mf
         s  + (y2 P b )mf
                       s  = Psb,mf = Pw + σκmf
                                            s . This is why a single multiplier λ suffices for both species.



                                                                 14
5. Validation cases

    We validate the theory in Section 4 against PNM simulations for both one- and two-component bubble
populations. We consider pore networks with a 2D lattice topology but 3D pore and throat shapes. Pores
are semi-cubic of size Rp , defined in Section 3, and throats are prisms with cross-sectional area At and length
lt . Lattices are 50×50 arrays of pores. Three networks are considered: (1) homogeneous pore size (Hom),
with Rp = 5 µm; (2) heterogeneous and spatially uncorrelated pore size (Unc), with Rp uniformly distributed
between 5 µm and 20 µm; and (3) heterogeneous and spatially correlated pore size (Cor ), with Rp drawn from
the same distribution as Unc but with correlation length 3 lt . Spatial correlation is established by creating a
random Gaussian field Y ∼ N (µ, C(l)) with mean µ = 0 and covariance function C(l) = exp(−(l/lc )2 ), where
l is the distance between pores. For each pore, Y is mapped to Rp via the probability integral transform
Rp = FU−1 (FN (Y )), where FN is the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of N and FU is the CDF of the
uniform distribution Rp ∈ [ 5, 20 ] µm. Throat lengths are lt = 10 µm in the Hom network and lt = 40 µm in
the Unc and Cor networks. Throat areas are At = 19.6 µm2 . All networks are depicted in Fig.4.




Figure 4: Pore networks used in PNM simulations to validate the proposed theory. Pores are depicted as red circles, with radii
proportional to the pores’ sizes Rp . The heterogeneous uncorrelated network is generated by randomly assigning Rp ∈ [ 5, 20 ]
µm to pores. The heterogeneous correlated network has the same pore sizes but with correlation length lc = 3 lt .


    We validate our theory in two stages. In the first stage, we consider single-component bubbles composed
of pure H2 . The goal is to demonstrate that our theory not only generalizes the formulation of [37], but also
removes key limitations that enhance predictive accuracy. In the second stage, we consider two-component
bubbles composed of H2 and CO2 . Table 1 lists the cases considered in each stage, which we detail next. We
     b
use Stot to denote the global bubble saturation in a network, which stands in contrast to local saturation S b
in individual pores. Recall that y1mix is the global (or bulk) mole fraction of H2 of all bubbles combined.
    In stage 1 of our validation, we consider cases in the top segment of Table 1, all taken from [37]. The first
three correspond to pure H2 bubbles (y1 = 1) occupying all pores in the network at fixed local saturation
S b . We label these Hom-One-Full, Unc-One-Full, and Cor-One-Full, depending on whether the network is
Hom, Unc, or Cor. In Unc-One-Full and Cor-One-Full, local saturation S b is uniform across all pores (thus


                                                              15
Table 1: Validation set used to compare the theory to PNM. Pore networks consist of homogeneous, heterogeneous uncorrelated,
and heterogeneous correlated pore sizes. Cases are divided into one- and two-component scenarios, each given a description and
                                          b , and y mix denote correlation length, total bubble saturation in the network, and
a code name for easy reference. The lc , Stot      1
bulk composition of the bubble population, respectively. Pop 1–3, Random y1 , and Small-pore y1 are defined in the text.


                                                                         b
                        Description                          lc         Stot         y1mix      Code name

                        Homogeneous, Fully occupied          ∞          30%            1        Hom-One-Full
       One component




                        Uncorrelated, Fully occupied          0         30%            1        Unc-One-Full

                        Correlated, Fully occupied           3 lt       60%            1        Cor-One-Full

                        Correlated, Partially occupied       3 lt       12%            1        Cor-One-Part

                        Homogeneous, Pop 1, Random y1        ∞          60%          0.50       Hom-Pop1-yRand

                        Homogeneous, Pop 2, Random y1        ∞          60%          0.75       Hom-Pop2-yRand

                        Homogeneous, Pop 3, Random y1        ∞          40%          0.49       Hom-Pop3-yRand

                        Uncorrelated, Pop 1, Random y1        0         60%          0.47       Unc-Pop1-yRand

                        Uncorrelated, Pop 2, Random y1        0         60%          0.73       Unc-Pop2-yRand

                        Uncorrelated, Pop 3, Random y1        0         39%          0.47       Unc-Pop3-yRand
       Two components




                        Correlated, Pop 1, Random y1         3 lt       60%          0.49       Cor-Pop1-yRand

                        Correlated, Pop 2, Random y1         3 lt       60%          0.74       Cor-Pop2-yRand

                        Correlated, Pop 3, Random y1         3 lt       39%          0.46       Cor-Pop3-yRand

                        Uncorrelated, Pop 1, Small-pore y1    0         60%          0.49       Unc-Pop1-ySmall

                        Uncorrelated, Pop 2, Small-pore y1    0         60%          0.74       Unc-Pop2-ySmall

                        Uncorrelated, Pop 3, Small-pore y1    0         40%          0.48       Unc-Pop3-ySmall

                        Correlated, Pop 1, Small-pore y1     3 lt       60%          0.49       Cor-Pop1-ySmall

                        Correlated, Pop 2, Small-pore y1     3 lt       60%          0.74       Cor-Pop2-ySmall

                        Correlated, Pop 3, Small-pore y1     3 lt       40%          0.48       Cor-Pop3-ySmall


 b
Stot = S b ), whereas in Hom-One-Full, S b is randomly drawn from [ 1, 5 ]%. These three cases correspond to
the more difficult problems in [37], which we use to demonstrate that our theory reproduces those results.
The fourth case, Cor-One-Part, corresponds to a scenario presented as a challenge in [37] (Section 7.2), whose
ripening dynamics that theory could not capture due to large initial bubble spacing. We show our theory
overcomes this limitation, thereby generalizing [37]. The setup places sub-critical bubbles in the largest 20%
of pore sizes, with local saturation sampled uniformly from S b ∈ [ 5, 35 ]%, and super-critical bubbles in the
smallest 20%, with S b sampled uniformly from [ 65, 95 ]%. Here too, all bubbles are composed of pure H2 .



                                                             16
   In stage 2 of the validation, we consider cases in segments 2–6 of Table 1. These comprise different
combinations of network type (Hom, Unc, Cor ), bubble population (Pop1, Pop2, Pop3 ), and spatial distri-
bution of y1 (yRand, ySmall ). Since network types were described above, we focus here on the three bubble
populations: In Pop1, all pores contain bubbles at local saturation S b = 60%, with roughly half by volume
being pure H2 and the other half pure CO2 . Pop2 is similar, but the pure CO2 bubbles are replaced by
bubbles that are an equimolar H2 –CO2 mixture. In Pop3, roughly half of the bubbles by volume are pure H2
at S b = 60%, and the other half are pure CO2 at S b = 30%. For each population, the labels yRand and ySmall
specify how bubbles are assigned to pores. In yRand, pores are chosen at random, implying no correlation
between pore size Rp and bubble composition y1 . In ySmall, the smallest pores are filled with H2 first, then
the remaining pores are filled with other bubbles (pure CO2 in Pop1 and Pop3, equimolar mixture in Pop2 ).
In the Cor network, ySmall produces spatial correlation in y1 , not just Rp . Hereafter, we refer to each of the
resulting 15 cases by the code names listed in Table 1 (e.g., Cor-Pop2-yRand ).
   The above initial conditions for two-component ripening are motivated by underground hydrogen storage.
Cyclic injections of H2 are often preceded by a cushion gas like CO2 , which can mix with subsequent H2
injections. In addition, cyclic injections can cause capillary trapping of bubbles within preferential flow paths
(larger pores), diverting subsequent H2 into smaller pores. This motivates the equimolar mixture in Pop2
and the ySmall placement. We note that placing H2 bubbles in larger pores would be a less challenging test
of our theory, since early-stage mass transfer is exclusively from CO2 to H2 due to differences in solubility
and diffusion coefficient, causing more bubble deformation when H2 resides in smaller pores.
   In all cases, the temperature T is set to 333 K, wetting-phase pressure Pw to 108 dynes/cm2 , surface tension
σ to 32 dynes/cm, molecular diffusion coefficients to D1 = 5.13 × 10−5 cm2 /s for H2 and D2 = 1.6 × 10−5
cm2 /s for CO2 , and Henry’s constants to H1 = 7.1 × 1010 dynes/cm2 for H2 and H2 = 0.16 × 1010 dynes/cm2
for CO2 . For each case in Table 1, the temporal evolution of the bubble population due to Ostwald ripening
is predicted by the theory and compared to PNM simulation. The population balance Eq.10 is discretized
over the phase space using the finite-volume method with a first-order upwind scheme. Although Eq.10 must
be solved numerically, it is far more efficient than PNM because there is no limit to the number of bubbles
that can be simulated. Moreover, networks with large correlation lengths in pore size require prohibitively
large representative elementary volumes (REVs) in the PNM, which is not a limitation for the theory.


6. Results

6.1. One-component ripening

   We begin by comparing the theory to PNM for the one-component ripening cases listed in Table 1.
Focusing on Hom-One-Full, Fig.5 shows the theory successfully predicts the temporal evolution of g(s; t).
Since the network is homogeneous with uniform Rp , and bubbles are composed of one component with y1 = 1,
the phase space is one-dimensional, consisting of only the S b axis. Focusing next on Unc-One-Full and Cor-
One-Full, Fig.6 compares the evolution of g(s; t) from the theory to the PNM, where good agreement is again


                                                       17
observed. The PNM is depited by a heat map, and the theory by white contour lines. Here, the phase space
is two-dimensional with axes S b and Rp , because y1 = 1. At t = 0, g(s; t) is a vertical stripe since all bubbles
have the same saturation. Over time, the higher curvature in smaller pores drives mass flux toward larger
pores, causing g(s; t) to shift left (toward S b = 0) at small Rp and right at large Rp . At equilibrium, curvature
is uniform across all bubbles, producing the oblique line in Fig.6. The results in Figs.5–6 for Hom-One-Full,
Unc-One-Full, and Cor-One-Full were also successfully predicted by the theory of [37].




Figure 5: Comparison of the bubble number density g(s; t) predicted by theory (white contours) and PNM (heat map). Since
bubbles are single-component (y1 = 1) and network is homogeneous, the phase space is one-dimensional with S b axis. Snapshots
are shown at t = 0, 0.1, 10 h, and equilibrium for the Hom-One-Full case in Table 1. The theory reproduces results from [37].




Figure 6: Comparison of the bubble number density g(s; t) predicted by theory (white contours) and PNM (heat map). Since
bubbles are single-component (y1 = 1), the phase space is two-dimensional with Rp and S b axes. Snapshots are shown at t = 0,
10, 100 h, and equilibrium for the Unc-One-Full and Cor-One-Full cases in Table 1. The theory reproduces results from [37].


    We now turn to Cor-One-Part, which was presented as a challenge in [37]. Fig.7 shows the complex initial


                                                             18
Figure 7: Comparison of the bubble number density g(s; t) predicted by theory (white contours) and PNM (heat map) for the
Cor-One-Part case. Snapshots are at t = 0, 10, 100 h, and equilibrium. Top row: theory of [37], which predicts two groups
evolving independently (unphysical). Bottom row: our theory, which captures interactions between distant bubbles accurately.




Figure 8: Average bubble volume ⟨V b ⟩, mean curvature ⟨κ⟩, and survived bubble fraction Fs versus time for the one-component
ripening cases in Table 1. The proposed theory (solid lines) shows good agreement with PNM (symbols). Predictions from [37]
(dashed lines) are slightly worse for Hom-One-Full, Unc-One-Full, and Cor-One-Full, but completely off for Cor-One-Part.




                                                             19
condition of g(s; t) and its subsequent evolution in time. The top row corresponds to the theory of [37], which
fails to predict this evolution, resulting in an isolated cluster of bubbles in the bottom-right of the phase
space that remains disconnected or “unaware” of other bubbles in the population. This failure is due to the
fundamental inability of that theory to capture interactions between bubbles that are multiple throats apart.
Our theory in the bottom row of Fig.7 removes this limitation, and is therefore superior to that of [37].
   Fig.8 shows the corresponding bulk properties of the above populations versus time. They consist of the
average bubble volume ⟨V b ⟩, mean curvature ⟨κ⟩, and survived fraction of bubbles Fs (i.e., current number
of bubbles divided by the number of bubbles at t = 0). These properties are readily computed from g(s; t):
                   Z                               Z                                         Z
               1                               1                           nb (t)
    ⟨V b ⟩ =          Vsb g(s; t) ds , ⟨κ⟩ =          κs g(s; t) ds , Fs =        , nb (t) =    g(s; t) ds (37)
             nb (t) Ω                        nb (t) Ω                      nb (0)             Ω

Good agreement between our theory and PNM is observed in all cases. Fig.8 also includes predictions from
[37], which are slightly worse for the first three cases (Hom-One-Full, Unc-One-Full, Cor-One-Full ) but
completely off for Cor-One-Part. In summary, Figs.5–8 demonstrate that our theory not only successfully
reproduces results from the theory of [37] for single-component ripening but also generalizes it by removing
key limitations. The next section takes this further by capturing two-component ripening dynamics.


6.2. Two-component ripening

6.2.1. Homogeneous network, uncorrelated composition
   We begin our comparison of the theory against PNM for two-component ripening by considering cases in
the second segment of Table 1, namely, Hom-Pop1-yRand, Hom-Pop2-yRand, and Hom-Pop3-yRand. These
correspond to the homogeneous network with random placement of bubbles at t = 0, i.e., no correlation
between y1 and Rp . Fig.9 shows the evolution of bubble number density g(s; t) versus time, where we see
good agreement between theory and PNM. Since Rp is uniform, the phase space is two-dimensional with y1
and S b axes. At t = 0, H2 and CO2 bubbles in Pop1 have local saturation S b = 60%. Pop2 is the same,
but instead of pure CO2 bubbles, we have equimolar H2 –CO2 bubbles. In Pop3, H2 bubbles have S b = 60%,
while CO2 bubbles have S b = 30%. In all three cases, as bubbles evolve, g(s; t) approaches a horizontal line
of constant y1 , corresponding to the equilibrium bubble composition. Due to differences in solubility and
diffusion coefficient, mass transfer is initially directed from CO2 bubbles to H2 bubbles, causing the S b of H2
bubbles to grow. This can lead to highly deformed bubbles during the initial stages of ripening.
   Once bubble compositions have nearly homogenized—a stage called partitioning [38]—one group (initially
pure H2 ) has high S b while the other (initially CO2 or equimolar mixture) has low S b . Thereafter, ripening
is driven by curvature differences in a stage called coevolution [38], causing the two groups to approach each
other along the constant-y1 line. At equilibrium, only one cluster remains, with all bubbles having the same
composition and curvature (thus saturation, since Rp is uniform). In Fig.9, the difference in S b at equilibrium
between the theory and PNM is 4–5%, and the difference in y1 is 0.5% for Pop1 and Pop2, but 14% for Pop3.
The larger y1 discrepancy in Pop3 arises because its CO2 bubbles are sub-critical (S b = 30%) and reside in



                                                      20
Figure 9: Comparison of the bubble number density g(s; t) predicted by the theory (white contours) and PNM (heat map) for
the two-component ripening cases Hom-Pop1-yRand, Hom-Pop2-yRand, and Hom-Pop3-yRand in Table 1. Since the network
is homogeneous with uniform Rp , the phase space is 2D with y1 and S b axes. Snapshots are at t = 0, 0.1, 10 s, and equilibrium.




Figure 10: Average bubble volume ⟨V b ⟩, mean curvature ⟨κ⟩, survived fraction Fs , and mean composition ⟨y1 ⟩ versus time
for two-component ripening cases Hom-Pop1-yRand, Hom-Pop2-yRand, and Hom-Pop3-yRand in Table 1. Theory (solid lines)
agrees with PNM (symbols) except for ⟨V b ⟩ at early times, and Fs and ⟨y1 ⟩ in Pop3. Deviations in ⟨V b ⟩ and ⟨y1 ⟩ arise because
PNM accounts for solute storage in water, while the theory does not. Deviation in Fs reflects instability of sub-critical ripening.



large pores, leaving substantial water volume that absorbs H2 during partitioning. The PNM captures this,
lowering the equilibrium y1 predicted, whereas the theory does not as it assigns no storage capacity to water.


                                                                21
   Fig.10 shows bulk properties ⟨V b ⟩, ⟨κ⟩, Fs , and mean composition ⟨y1 ⟩ versus time, where ⟨y1 ⟩ is computed
analogously to Eq.37. Note this is identical to y1mf in Eq.30. The agreement is decent except for early stages
of ⟨V b ⟩, and late stages of Fs and ⟨y1 ⟩ for Pop3. Focusing on ⟨V b ⟩, we see a temporary sag in PNM that is
present but much less pronounced in the theory. This sag in PNM has two causes: (1) The wetting phase
can store dissolved solute, which introduces a lag in mass transfer between H2 and CO2 /mixture bubbles
on account of differences in solubility and diffusion coefficient. This effect is not captured by the theory, as
mass exchange between bubbles is instantaneous; (2) The rapid initial influx of mass into H2 bubbles causes
them to grow and become deformed, resulting in the observed peak in ⟨κ⟩. Since bubbles are gaseous, their
compressibility causes a temporary decrease in mean volume, before deformed bubbles relax back to lower
curvatures. This effect is captured by our theory, which is why the spike in ⟨κ⟩ is predicted accurately.
   Focusing next on Fs and ⟨y1 ⟩, we see good agreement for Pop1 and Pop2, but significant error for Pop3.
The ⟨y1 ⟩ deviation in Pop3 occurs early (∼ 10−4 s), consistent with the water storage effect discussed above.
The Fs deviation occurs later (∼ 100 s), after coevolution is complete, and reflects a different mechanism: in
Pop3, CO2 bubbles are sub-critical (spherical) from the start and remain so as they shrink during partitioning.
The subsequent curvature-driven ripening of such spherical bubbles is unstable [38], with survival depending
on local neighborhood configuration. In the theory, sub-critical bubbles interact only with the mean field,
through which they tend to lose mass to super-critical (deformed) bubbles. In PNM, sub-critical bubbles
also exchange mass with neighboring sub-critical bubbles, some of which gain mass at the expense of others.
This allows more bubbles to survive in PNM than in the theory, explaining why the theory underpredicts Fs .

6.2.2. Heterogeneous uncorrelated network, uncorrelated composition
   We now focus on cases in the third segment of Table 1, namely, Unc-Pop1-yRand, Unc-Pop2-yRand, and
Unc-Pop3-yRand. These correspond to the heterogeneous and uncorrelated network with random placement
of bubbles at t = 0, i.e., no correlation between y1 and Rp . Now, g(s; t) lives in a three-dimensional phase
space. To visualize it, we consider three projections (or marginals) of g(s; t) onto the S b –y1 , Rp –S b , and
Rp –y1 planes. The S b –y1 projection is shown in Fig.11 at t = 0, 1 s, 10 s, and equilibrium. The evolution of
g(s; t) is very similar to Fig.9, where H2 and CO2 /mixture bubbles first approach a line of constant y1 , then
approach each other whilst staying close to that line. One difference compared to the homogeneous network
in the previous section is that the evolution here is slower. Another is that at equilibrium, bubbles attain
different S b to ensure uniform curvature due to Rp variability. Overall, the theory is in good agreement with
PNM. The largest discrepancy corresponds to Pop3 for reasons already discussed in Section 6.2.1.
   The corresponding Rp –S b projection is shown in Fig.12. At t = 0, g(s; t) appears as a vertical stripe in
Pop1 and Pop2 because S b = 60% is uniform across all bubbles, but as two stripes in Pop3 because S b = 60%
holds for H2 bubbles and S b = 30% for CO2 bubbles. As time progresses, g(s; t) splits into two stripes
corresponding to the CO2 /mixture (left) and H2 (right) bubbles, since each pore size is occupied by both
bubble types at t = 0. Once bubble compositions have homogenized, the two stripes approach each other and
merge into an oblique line similar to that in Fig.6. This is because for the same curvature, smaller pores


                                                      22
Figure 11: Projection of the bubble number density g(s; t) onto the S b –y1 plane, predicted by the theory (white contours) and
PNM (heat map) for the two-component ripening cases Unc-Pop1-yRand, Unc-Pop2-yRand, and Unc-Pop3-yRand in Table 1.
Network is heterogeneous and uncorrelated with random bubble placement. Snapshots are at t = 0, 1, 10 s, and equilibrium.



require less bubble deformation, thus lower S b . Here too, the agreement between theory and PNM is good.
The observations and takeaways remain similar for the Rp –y1 projection shown in Fig.13.
    Finally, Fig.14 shows how bulk properties ⟨V b ⟩, ⟨κ⟩, Fs , and ⟨y1 ⟩ evolve with time. Overall, theory and
PNM are in good agreement, with larger deviations observed in Pop3. Similar to Fig.10, the ⟨y1 ⟩ deviation in
Pop3 arises because PNM accounts for solute storage in water, whereas the theory does not. The Fs deviation
reflects instability of sub-critical bubble ripening. Namely, in Pop3, CO2 bubbles are spherical from the start
and remain so during partitioning, after which their survival depends on local neighborhood configuration
rather than interaction with the mean field. That said, Fs and ⟨y1 ⟩ are in slightly better agreement here
than in the homogeneous network, since the variability in Rp likely provides some stabilization.

6.2.3. Heterogeneous correlated network, uncorrelated composition
    The results for the cases in the fourth segment of Table 1 are very similar to those from the previous
section. These cases are Cor-Pop1-yRand, Cor-Pop2-yRand, and Cor-Pop3-yRand, corresponding to the


                                                              23
Figure 12: Projection of the bubble number density g(s; t) onto the Rp –S b plane, predicted by the theory (white contours) and
PNM (heat map) for the two-component ripening cases Unc-Pop1-yRand, Unc-Pop2-yRand, and Unc-Pop3-yRand in Table 1.
Network is heterogeneous and uncorrelated with random bubble placement. Snapshots are at t = 0, 1, 10 s, and equilibrium.



heterogeneous and spatially correlated network with random bubble placement, i.e., no correlation between
y1 and Rp . Due to this similarity with the uncorrelated network, we only present the bulk properties in
Fig.15, which is nearly indistinguishable from Fig.14. The only difference is that late-time ripening dynamics
are slightly slower in the correlated network (see Fs ). The likely explanation is that spatial correlations in
Rp play little role in early ripening, which is driven primarily by gradients in bubble composition. What
matters is which bubbles (H2 or CO2 /mixture) are initially neighbors—or equivalently, how y1 is arranged
spatially. This arrangement is random both here and in the previous section, hence the small difference in
results. At late times, however, when ripening is driven mainly by gradients in curvature, larger correlation
entails smaller gradients in κ (since Rp controls κ through Eq.9), thus slower mass transfer between bubbles.


6.2.4. Heterogeneous uncorrelated network, correlated composition
    We now turn to cases in the fifth segment of Table 1, namely, Unc-Pop1-ySmall, Unc-Pop2-ySmall, and
Unc-Pop3-ySmall. These correspond to the heterogeneous uncorrelated network with H2 bubbles placed in


                                                              24
Figure 13: Projection of the bubble number density g(s; t) onto the Rp –y1 plane, predicted by the theory (white contours) and
PNM (heat map) for the two-component ripening cases Unc-Pop1-yRand, Unc-Pop2-yRand, and Unc-Pop3-yRand in Table 1.
Network is heterogeneous and uncorrelated with random bubble placement. Snapshots are at t = 0, 1, 10 s, and equilibrium.




Figure 14: Bulk properties ⟨V b ⟩, ⟨κ⟩, Fs , and ⟨y1 ⟩ versus time for the two-component ripening cases Unc-Pop1-yRand, Unc-
Pop2-yRand, and Unc-Pop3-yRand in Table 1. The proposed theory (solid lines) shows good agreement with PNM (symbols).



small pores and CO2 /mixture bubbles in large pores. Since the two bubble groups have equal bulk volume,
H2 bubbles are more numerous. Similar to Section 6.2.2, we consider projections of g(s; t) onto the S b –y1 ,
Rp –S b , and Rp –y1 planes. The S b –y1 projection is omitted because it is very similar to Fig.11. Figs.16–17



                                                             25
Figure 15: Bulk properties ⟨V b ⟩, ⟨κ⟩, Fs , and ⟨y1 ⟩ versus time for the two-component ripening cases Cor-Pop1-yRand, Cor-Pop2-
yRand, and Cor-Pop3-yRand in Table 1. The network is correlated and bubble placement is random. The proposed theory (solid
lines) shows good agreement with PNM (symbols). Results are nearly indistinguishable from Fig.14 for uncorrelated network.



illustrate the remaining two projections, where we see qualitatively different evolution patterns compared to
prior sections when the initial arrangement of y1 was spatially random. The agreement between theory and
PNM is good, with errors larger in Pop3 due to reasons already discussed in Section 6.2.1.
    Bulk properties are plotted in Fig.18. The main difference compared to Fig.14 concerns ⟨y1 ⟩: while
roughly constant in Fig.14, it now decreases with time. Note that ⟨y1 ⟩, which equals y1mf by Eq.30, is not the
same as y1mix . By Corollary 1, y1mix is constant over time in the theory, and only as t → ∞ does y1mf → y1mix .4
The values of y1mix for each case are listed in Table 1. One can verify that the equilibrium values of ⟨y1 ⟩ in
Fig.18 match the y1mix values in Table 1. The discrepancy in equilibrium ⟨y1 ⟩ for Pop3 arises because some
H2 is absorbed by water in PNM—an effect not captured by the theory—resulting in lower ⟨y1 ⟩ predicted by
PNM. The deviation in Fs reflects the instability of sub-critical ripening, as discussed in Section 6.2.1.


6.2.5. Heterogeneous correlated network, correlated composition
    We now examine the final segment of Table 1: Cor-Pop1-ySmall, Cor-Pop2-ySmall, and Cor-Pop3-
ySmall, which correspond to the heterogeneous correlated network with H2 bubbles placed in small pores and
CO2 /mixture bubbles in large pores. These cases are the most challenging because both Rp and y1 are spa-
tially correlated. As in the previous section, we omit the S b –y1 projection of g(s; t) because it is very similar
to Fig.11. The remaining two projections, Rp –S b and Rp –y1 , are shown in Figs.19–20. We see satisfactory
agreement between theory and PNM, but errors are significantly larger than in previous sections. This is
especially apparent in the equilibrium configurations of Pop1 and Pop3, and in the theory overestimating
the speed of ripening. Fig.21 shows bulk properties versus time, with consistent observations.
    The most likely explanation relates to two fundamental assumptions in the theory. First, bubbles at state
s interact with a mean-field having composition y1mf and curvature κmf                   b mf        mf
                                                                    s —equivalently (y1 P )s . Only κs

accounts for spatial correlations through Eq.28, hence the subscript s. The mean-field composition y1mf ,
computed via Eq.30, is s-independent and informed by all bubbles in the population, whether proximate or


   4 From Appendix   E, γ → 1 as t → ∞. Therefore, both y1mf,∗ and y1mf converge to y1mix .



                                                               26
Figure 16: Projection of the bubble number density g(s; t) onto the Rp –S b plane, predicted by theory (white contours) and PNM
(heat map) for two-component ripening cases Unc-Pop1-ySmall, Unc-Pop2-ySmall, and Unc-Pop3-ySmall in Table 1. Network
is heterogeneous and uncorrelated with H2 bubbles placed in small pores. Snapshots are at t = 0, 1, 10 s, and equilibrium.



distant relative to the s-bubble. This causes overestimation of the phase velocities through Eq.18b, directly
impacting dy1,s /dt and indirectly impacting dSsb /dt through coupling terms, thus accelerating ripening. Sec-
ond, spatial correlations accounted for in κmf
                                            s  are of pore size Rp , not composition y1 . This assumption was
necessary to render the computation of mean-field properties tractable via approximations made between
Eqs.22 and 28. The errors in Figs.19–20 are the price we pay for these simplifications. The reason Pop2
predictions are more accurate is that chemical-potential gradients between H2 and mixture bubbles are less
than gradients between H2 and CO2 bubbles in Pop1 and Pop3, resulting in weaker disequilibrium.


7. Discussion

7.1. Limitations of the theory

    This work presents the first theory for multicomponent ripening of bubbles in porous media, generalizing
that of [37] for single-component ripening. It also simplifies the formulation and removes key limitations of


                                                              27
Figure 17: Projection of the bubble number density g(s; t) onto the Rp –y1 plane, predicted by theory (white contours) and PNM
(heat map) for two-component ripening cases Unc-Pop1-ySmall, Unc-Pop2-ySmall, and Unc-Pop3-ySmall in Table 1. Network
is heterogeneous and uncorrelated with H2 bubbles placed in small pores. Snapshots are at t = 0, 1, 10 s, and equilibrium.




Figure 18: Bulk properties ⟨V b ⟩, ⟨κ⟩, Fs , and ⟨y1 ⟩ versus time for two-component ripening cases Unc-Pop1-ySmall, Unc-Pop2-
ySmall, and Unc-Pop3-ySmall in Table 1. The proposed theory (solid lines) shows good agreement with PNM (symbols).



that theory, as demonstrated in Section 6.1. While we focused on H2 and CO2 bubbles, other gases relevant to
underground hydrogen storage (e.g., N2 , CH4 ) or otherwise could be used without loss of generality. Below,
we discuss pending limitations of the theory to guide future research. They are divided into methodological,



                                                              28
Figure 19: Projection of the bubble number density g(s; t) onto the Rp –S b plane, predicted by theory (white contours) and PNM
(heat map) for two-component ripening cases Cor-Pop1-ySmall, Cor-Pop2-ySmall, and Cor-Pop3-ySmall in Table 1. Network
is heterogeneous and correlated with H2 bubbles placed in small pores. Snapshots are at t = 0, 1, 10 s, and equilibrium.



which exist within the assumptions of the theory and may be addressed by reformulating certain parts, and
foundational, which stem from core assumptions that may require a completely new formulation.


7.1.1. Methodological limitations
    Even under the assumptions of the theory, Section 6.2.5 showed that predicting ripening of bubble pop-
ulations faces three remaining challenges: (1) capturing both kinetics and equilibrium state is difficult when
composition is spatially correlated (Cor-ySmall ); (2) late-time predictions of bubble composition ⟨y1 ⟩ are
overestimated when the wetting phase is preferentially undersaturated in one component at t = 0 (Pop3 ); (3)
early-time predictions of bubble volume ⟨V b ⟩ exhibit a temporary sag whose magnitude is underestimated.
    Addressing the first limitation requires alternative approximations to those in Eqs.22–28 and Eq.30. The
former postulates dominant control of pore-size correlations over other spatial correlations, while the latter
removes state-dependence from y1mf and replaces the closure Eq.17 with Eq.18 to avoid numerical difficulties
and ensure convergence to equilibrium. The analysis in Appendix B shows this reformulation is necessary


                                                              29
Figure 20: Projection of the bubble number density g(s; t) onto the Rp –y1 plane, predicted by theory (white contours) and PNM
(heat map) for two-component ripening cases Cor-Pop1-ySmall, Cor-Pop2-ySmall, and Cor-Pop3-ySmall in Table 1. Network
is heterogeneous and correlated with H2 bubbles placed in small pores. Snapshots are at t = 0, 1, 10 s, and equilibrium.




Figure 21: Bulk properties ⟨V b ⟩, ⟨κ⟩, Fs , and ⟨y1 ⟩ versus time for two-component ripening cases Cor-Pop1-ySmall, Cor-Pop2-
ySmall, and Cor-Pop3-ySmall in Table 1. The proposed theory (solid lines) shows satisfactory agreement with PNM (symbols).



for Eulerian (grid-based) approaches used to discretize and solve the population balance Eq.10 (e.g., finite
volumes herein). A Lagrangian (particle-based) method could obviate such reformulation and use the more
                                                                              mf
accurate closure Eq.17 directly. This in turn would enable a state-dependent y1,s that accounts for spatial



                                                              30
correlations in composition. The second and third limitations arise because the wetting phase has no storage
capacity for dissolved solute, rendering mass transfer between bubbles effectively instantaneous. This causes
overprediction of ⟨y1 ⟩ and the inability to capture the sag in ⟨V b ⟩. One remedy is to augment Eq.18 with an
auxiliary balance equation for dissolved solute in the wetting phase. These remedies are left as future work.
   While the theory was tested for two-component bubbles, extension to multiple components is straightfor-
ward: each new component adds another dimension to the phase space and an extra phase velocity to Eq.18.
Finally, contact angle and pore shape can be generalized beyond those assumed here (zero contact angle,
semi-cubic pores), as they enter the theory solely through the curvature-volume relation in Eq.9.


7.1.2. Foundational limitations
   Foundational limitations question the very choice of phase-space axes we have made for the theory, namely,
Rp , S b , and y1 . The most significant is the assumption that each bubble occupies no more than one pore,
which renders the use of pore size Rp as a state coordinate inappropriate. However, a clear alternative is
not self-evident because even if a bubble occupies only two pores, it begs the question: which pores?—since
their sizes matter. Let the bubble occupy three or more pores and the question grows with combinatorial
complexity. Another limitation of the same type is when bubbles, even if confined to one pore, occupy
pores with different shape or wettability (i.e., contact angle). Put differently, there is heterogeneity in the
curvature-volume relation Eq.9, which the theory assumes to be uniform across all pores. Introducing a
separate axis for each shape or contact angle would make the theory intractable. A viable option might be to
parameterize the curvature-volume relation with contact angle and shape-controlling constants and add those
as extra phase-space axes. Either way, an increase in dimensionality of the phase space seems unavoidable.

7.2. Computational efficiency and upscaling

   Since the population balance Eq.10 must be discretized and solved numerically (here using the finite-
volume method), readers might wonder if there are true gains in computational cost over solving the problem
spatially using PNM. The answer is an emphatic yes for two reasons: (1) there is no limit to the number of
bubbles that can be simulated in the theory, whereas the cost of PNM scales with the number of bubbles;
(2) when the correlation length lc of the porous medium is large, truly enormous pore networks are needed
to ensure ripening predictions are representative of an REV, which is computationally prohibitive. The
theory’s cost is independent of lc , enabling predictions out of reach with PNM or any other pore-scale model.
For the results in Section 6, the theory was faster by a factor of 192 for homogeneous networks and 24 for
heterogeneous networks. These speedups were achieved despite using a very fine mesh for the phase space,
which from experience we have found unnecessary, meaning even higher acceleration is possible.


7.3. Implications for underground hydrogen storage

   The proposed theory has practical applications in underground hydrogen storage, where major concerns
include: (1) inability to recover injected H2 due to capillary trapping; (2) loss of purity of recovered H2 ;


                                                      31
and (3) maintaining high storage capacity and injectivity (i.e., low flow resistance) across multiple injection-
withdrawal cycles. The theory predicts which pore sizes are occupied by bubbles, their volumes, and compo-
sitions at all times. When coupled to a permeability model like Carman-Kozeny [39, 40], where the porous
medium is represented by a bundle of capillary tubes of radii Rp , predictions of g(s; t) can be translated into
estimates of relative permeability evolution. This would enable prediction of storage capacity and injectivity
versus time, and could be used to maximize H2 retrieval and minimize purity loss in cyclic injections.
   The ySmall cases in Section 5 were motivated by the scenario where cushion gas (e.g., CO2 , CH4 , N2 ),
possibly mixed with H2 , gets trapped in preferential flow paths (larger pores) during the first injection cycle
as it is chased by H2 . The H2 injected in future cycles is diverted into secondary flow paths (smaller pores)
not yet blocked by trapped bubbles. If this conceptualization is correct, maximizing H2 recovery would
suggest choosing a cushion gas that feeds into H2 bubbles, causing them to grow and coalesce into mobile
ganglia. CO2 would be such a candidate: Section 5 shows mass transfer is directed from CO2 to H2 bubbles
within minutes. While this would promote mobilization, it would also entail H2 -purity loss. Alternatively,
a cushion gas like CH4 would draw mass out of H2 bubbles, moving H2 from smaller pores into larger
pores where CH4 resides. Recovery through these preferential flow paths would then encounter minimal flow
resistance—though here too, purity loss is inevitable to relocate the H2 . Future work should determine initial
conditions that arise from cyclic injections in a given microstructure to enable optimizing storage operations.


8. Conclusion

   We have presented the first kinetic theory for multicomponent Ostwald ripening of bubbles in porous
media. The formulation describes a trapped bubble population with a number-density function g(s; t) in a
three-dimensional statistical space of bubble states s. The coordinates of this space consist of the size of the
occupied pore Rp , occupied fraction of the pore volume S b (bubble saturation), and bubble composition y1 .
The theory predicts the evolution of g(s; t) in time through a population balance equation. Closure is achieved
through mean-field approximations that embed the physics of ripening, account for spatial correlations in
pore size, and ensure convergence to a physically meaningful equilibrium with provable mass conservation.
   The theory generalizes that of [37] for single-component ripening, removing key limitations such as the
inability to capture interactions between distant bubbles. Systematic validation against pore-network simu-
lations across 19 cases—spanning homogeneous, heterogeneous, correlated, and uncorrelated networks with
various bubble populations—shows good agreement with PNM in both the evolution of g(s; t) and bulk prop-
erties of the population, without any adjustable parameters. The most challenging cases involve spatially
correlated bubble composition, where errors arise due to methodological limitations of the theory discussed
in Section 7.1.1. Unlike PNM, the theory allows for arbitrarily large bubble populations and arbitrary cor-
relation lengths in pore size, enabling predictions beyond PNM’s reach. This makes the theory a practical
tool for predicting Ostwald ripening in a variety of applications, including underground hydrogen storage.




                                                      32
Acknowledgments

   This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation, United States un-
der Grant No. CBET-2348723. N.B. and L.A. gratefully acknowledge funding support from the William
A. Fustos Family Professorship in Energy and Mineral Engineering at the Pennsylvania State University.
We acknowledge the Institute for Computational and Data Sciences (ICDS) at Penn State University for
computational resources.


Declaration of interests

   The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that
could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.


Appendix A. Derivation of areal porosity

   We derive an expression for areal porosity ϕa in Eq.13 of a network with average coordination number z,
tortuosity τ , throat cross-sectional area At , and throat length lt . Pick one pore and draw a cylinder (in 2D) or
sphere (in 3D) of radius l centered at it. How many throats does the surface of this cylinder/sphere intersect?
Denoting this number by zn , areal porosity ϕa can be estimated as the ratio of the total cross-sectional area
of intersected throats AT = zn At to the surface area of the cylinder/sphere itself AS = 2πlh in 2D (h is
network’s out-of-plane thickness) or AS = 4πl2 in 3D. Thus, all we need is an expression for zn . We proceed
by estimating the number of pores within an annulus from radial distance l to l + lt as np = AS lt /(lt2 h) in 2D
and np = AS lt /lt3 in 3D, where the denominator represents the bulk area/volume associated with each pore.
From each of these np pores, roughly z/2 throats emanate out of the cylinder/sphere, and z/2 point inward.
The latter are the ones intersected by the cylinder/sphere, resulting in zn = np z/2. Substituting for np and
inserting zn into ϕa = zn At /AS from above, we get ϕa = CAt /lt with C = z/(2h) in 2D and C = z/(2lt ) in 3D.


Appendix B. Rationale for reformulating Eq.17 into Eq.18

   The phase-velocity expressions for dSsb /dt and dy1,s /dt in Eq.17 are numerically problematic when an
Eulerian (grid-based) method (like finite volume herein) is used to solve the population balance Eq.10. Our
goal is to demonstrate this difficulty with an example, and show why the reformulated expressions in Eq.18
do not suffer from it. To begin, consider a bubble population residing in a homogeneous network (uniform
Rp ) for simplicity. Furthermore, assume the majority of bubbles in the network (1 − ε fraction of them, where
ε ≪ 1) have mutually equilibrated except a small minority (ε fraction) that are at state s∗ . For such a system,
mean-field properties are close (arbitrarily as ε → 0) to the equilibrated majority’s state—we therefore do not
distinguish between the majority and mean field and use the superscript (·)mf for both. Given this setup,
let us now analyze how the s∗ -bubbles would evolve under Eq.17 to equilibrate with the mean field.



                                                        33
   At equilibrium, s∗ -bubbles will satisfy dSsb∗ /dt = 0 and dy1,s∗ /dt = 0, with s∗ corresponding to the mean-
field state smf . This point, smf , is the intersection of two curves: one defined by dSsb /dt = 0 and the other by
dy1,s /dt = 0—s here is a free index. Fig.B.1 visualizes this in the slightly altered phase space with coordinates
(κ/κmf , y1 ), instead of (S b , y1 ). We pause to note that the majority of bubbles must be super-critical (non-
spherical) because otherwise they would not be in equilibrium (contradiction); ripening of spherical bubbles
is unstable to perturbations [20]. This makes the coordinate mapping S b 7→ κ/κmf well-posed, otherwise the
map would not be injective (i.e., spherical and deformed bubbles with different S b could map onto the same
κ). The left panel of Fig.B.1 depicts the dSsb /dt = 0 curve in red and the dy1,s /dt = 0 curve in black.
   To see why dSsb /dt = 0 and dy1,s /dt = 0 correspond to curves, use them to set the LHS of Eq.17 to zero:

                            D1                             D2
                                  (y1 P b )mf − (y1 P b )s +      (y2 P b )mf − (y2 P b )s
                                                                                           
                        0=                                                                                       (B.1a)
                            H1                                 H2
                                 D1                                   D2
                                      (y1 P b )mf − (y1 P b )s − y1,s      (y2 P b )mf − (y2 P b )s
                                                                                                   
                        0 = y2,s                                                                                 (B.1b)
                                 H1                                   H2

Substituting y2,s = 1 − y1,s and Psb = Pw + σκs , and recognizing (y1 P b )mf ≈ y1mf (P b )mf due to the population
being in near equilibrium, the conclusion follows. Notice we have dropped the subscript s from (·)mf
                                                                                                  s  because
the mean field here does not depend on s. Now, we claim that regardless of where the s∗ -bubbles are located in
the (κ/κmf , y1 ) plane, they will move towards smf depicted by the yellow dot in Fig.B.1. Moreover, if at any
point during that movement s∗ falls inside the wedge defined by the space between the black and red curves
in Fig.B.1 (left panel), then it will stay inside that wedge as it approaches smf . But since this movement
forces s∗ through an ever narrowing corridor, at some point the gap between the two curves becomes smaller
than the size of a single (finite-volume) grid used to discretize Eq.10. This is shown by the zoom-in inset in
Fig.B.1. Because phase velocities on the faces of this grid point into the grid, as their centroids fall outside
the wedge, the s∗ -bubbles become trapped within that grid and their progress towards smf gets halted.
   To prove this claim, we examine the signs of dSsb /dt and dy1,s /dt everywhere on the (κ/κmf , y1 ) plane.
Clearly, if dSsb /dt = 0 defines a curve (red), splitting the plane into two regions, either dSsb /dt > 0 or dSsb /dt < 0
must hold in each region. To determine the sign of each region, it suffices to evaluate the sign of dSsb′ /dt at
an arbitrary point s′ away from the red curve in Fig.B.1 (left panel). We pick this point to lie on the vertical
line y1,s′ = y1mf above the yellow dot (smf ). Substituting this into the RHS of Eq.17a yields:

                                      dSsb′
                                            = C1 P b,mf − Psb′ = C1 κmf − κs′
                                                                             
                                                                                                                   (B.2)
                                       dt

where C1 > 0.5 The second equality follows from P b = Pw + σκ. Since κs′ > κmf at the point we have chosen,
dSsb′ /dt < 0. Therefore, dSsb /dt < 0 must hold for all s in the region left of the red curve in Fig.B.1 (left panel),
and dSsb /dt > 0 in the region to its right. An identical argument proves that dy1,s /dt > 0 must hold left of the
black curve, and dy1,s /dt < 0 to its right. However, this time the arbitrary point is chosen on the horizontal


  5 Because dκ ′ /dS b > 0 in Eq.17a on account of bubbles being super-critical.
              s     s′




                                                              34
Figure B.1: (Left) Schematic of the curves defined by dSsb /dt = 0 and dy1,s /dt = 0 for Eq.17 in phase space for a homogeneous
network. The phase space is 2D because pore size (Rp ) is uniform, with equivalent coordinates (κ/κmf , y1 ) instead of (S b , y1 ).
The two curves form an ever narrowing corridor that bubbles must traverse to reach equilibrium (yellow dot). At some point,
the corridor’s width is smaller than the grid used to discretize the population balance Eq.10, halting further progress towards
the yellow dot. (Right) The reformulation in Eq.18 removes this drawback by repositioning the black line to widen the corridor.



line κs′ = κmf , implying Psb′ = P b,mf . Substituting this into Eq.17b yields:

                                                  dy1,s′                  
                                                         = C2 y1mf − y1,s′                                                   (B.3)
                                                   dt

where C2 > 0, and the sign of each region is determined.
    What we have shown above is that the vertical component of the phase velocity dSsb /dt, which is pro-
portional to dκs /dt by Eq.9 and the chain rule, points down in the region left of the red curve and points
up to the right of it. Similarly, the horizontal component of the phase velocity dy1,s /dt points right in the
region left of the black curve and points left to the right of it. This means once s∗ -bubbles fall into the wedge
between the red and black curves, they cannot escape it and the numerical problem above is inevitable.
    The reformulation of Eq.17 into Eq.18 solves this problem by repositioning the black curve to the vertical
line shown in the right panel of Fig.B.1. This broadens the wedge and prevents the gap between the red and
black curves from becoming smaller than the grid size unless s∗ is very close to the yellow dot (equilibrium).
Empirically, we observed the same problem in heterogeneous networks, which are far less tractable because the
phase space is 3D. As discussed in Section 7.1.1, the reformulation of Eq.17, which comes with approximation
errors, may be avoided if a Lagrangian (particle-based) method is used to solve the population balance Eq.10.


Appendix C. Validating Eq.29 for bubble spacing

    We validate the lRR′ computed from Eq.29 against direct computations from the PNM in Section 3. We
consider heterogeneous correlated and uncorrelated networks corresponding to the SC-Cor and SC-Unc cases
in Section 5, respectively. Since the exact position of all bubbles are known in the PNM, we can compute


                                                                35
Figure C.2: Inter-bubble spacing lRR′ predicted from Eq.29 in the theory (solid lines) versus PNM using Eq.C.1 (circles). For
clarity, we use Rx → Ry to represent lRx Ry . Pore sizes are divided into n = 20 bins, where R1 is the smallest and Rn the largest.



lRR′ directly using the following formula corresponding to the variable’s definition:

                                                 lRR′ = ⟨ min
                                                            ′
                                                              |xR − xR′ | ⟩R                                                (C.1)
                                                             R


Namely, lRR′ is the average nearest distance from bubbles residing in pores of size Rp to bubbles in pores
of size Rp′ . In Eq.C.1, xR and xR′ denote the positions of these bubbles. The minimum is taken over all
bubble-occupied Rp′ and the average ⟨·⟩ over all bubble-occupied Rp . Incidentally, Eq.C.1 is also used to
compute dRR′ in Eq.29 with the crucial difference that the minimum and average are taken over all pores in
the network regardless of bubble occupancy. Fig.C.2 plots the lRR′ obtained from Eq.29 against that from
Eq.C.1. The comparison is made by dividing pore sizes in the networks into n = 20 bins and focusing on the
first R1 (smallest pores) and last Rn (largest pores) bins. This pick is motivated by the fact that R1 and Rn
have the largest contrast among other pore sizes, thus are farthest apart spatially in the correlated network.
This places the most stringent test on Eq.29. In Fig.C.2, we plot lRR′ for subscripts R and R′ taken from
the set {R1 , Rn }. For clarity’s sake, we use the notation Rx → Ry in the legend of Fig.C.2 to denote lRx Ry .
    For better visualization, instead of plotting lRR′ versus time, the x-axis of Fig.C.2 denotes the fraction of
the smallest bubble-occupied pores in the network, i.e., FR1 . Since bubbles in R1 vanish the fastest during
ripening, FR1 serves as a proxy for time. For lR1 R1 and lRn R1 , Eq.29 is an explicit function of FR1 . For lR1 Rn
and lRn Rn , which depend explicitly on FRn , we convert to FR1 using the corresponding value from the PNM
simulation. To improve visualization, we normalize the y-axis by dividing lRR′ by the lattice spacing of the
network. Fig.C.2 shows acceptable agreement between Eq.29 and PNM, validating the former’s accuracy.




                                                                 36
Appendix D. Proof of Theorem 1

   Beginning from the leftmost expression in Theorem 1, we can write:

    dntot
               Z                Z                    Z
      α     d                           ∂gs
          =       nα,s gs ds =     nα,s      ds = −     nα,s ∇ · (gs u) ds =
     dt     dt Ω                 Ω      ∂t            Ω
                Z                       Z                        Z                       Z                         (D.1)
              −    ∇ · (nα,s gs u) ds +     gs u · ∇nα,s ds = −       nα,s gs u · ν dΓ +   gs u · ∇nα,s ds
                    Ω                         Ω                              ∂Ω               Ω

where we have used the abbreviated notation gs = g(s; t). The second equality follows from the Leibniz
integral rule and the fact that neither Ω (the entire phase space) nor nα,s depend on time t. The third
equality followed from using the population balance equation Eq.10 to substitute for ∂gs /∂t. The fourth is
the consequence of applying the product rule, and the fifth follows from the divergence theorem where ν is
the outward unit normal on ∂Ω. Noticing u · ∇nα,s = dnα,s /dt holds due to Eq.15, we arrive at:

                             dntot
                                        Z                      Z
                                α                                    dnα,s
                                   =−       nα,s gs u · ν dΓ +    gs       ds                                      (D.2)
                               dt        ∂Ω                     Ω     dt

   We must now show that the first integral on the RHS is zero, because then the theorem is proven. Recall
from Section 4.1 that ∂Ω consists of six boundaries: Rp = 0, Rp = Rpmax , y1 = 0, y1 = 1, S b = 0, and S b = 1.
The BCs at all these boundaries is gs = 0, except S b = 0. Therefore, the following holds:

                                                                         dS b
                               Z                           Z
                                    nα,s gs u · ν dΓ = lim        nα,s gs s dΓ                                     (D.3)
                                ∂Ω                     ϵ→0 S b =ϵ         dt

where we have used the fact that u · ν = dSsb /dt holds on S b = ϵ for fixed ϵ > 0. We now show the integrand
on the RHS goes to zero as ϵ → 0. More precisely, the integral can be bounded as:

                              dS b                    dS b              dS b
              Z                        Z                                      Z
                       nα,s gs s dΓ ≤          nα,s gs s dΓ ≤ nα,s s                 | gs | dΓ                     (D.4)
                S b =ϵ         dt       S b =ϵ         dt                dt ∞ S b =ϵ

through a straightforward application of Hölder’s inequality. For brevity, we denote the portion of Ω where
S b = ϵ (i.e., integration domain) by Γϵ . The rightmost integral of |gs | on Γϵ (L1 norm) is bounded since gs ≥ 0
and the integral on Ω ⊃ Γϵ is bounded, equaling the number of bubbles in the population nb .
   We thus focus on the L∞ norm of nα,s dSsb /dt over Γϵ in Eq.D.4. As ϵ → 0, it is evident Ssb → 0. In this
limit, bubbles are circular/spherical in shape whose curvature scales like κs ∼ (Ssb )−1/d . We use the symbol
a ∼ b to mean: there exist constants C1 and C2 such that C1 b ≤ a ≤ C2 b. From Psb = Pw + σκs , we have
Psb ∼ (Ssb )−1/d . Since Vsb = Vp,s Ssb , we also have Vsb ∼ Ssb . From the ideal gas law, nα,s = yα,s Psb Vsb /RT holds,
and because yα,s ∼ 1 we can write nα,s ∼ (Ssb )1−1/d . Recalling Eq.18a for dSsb /dt in Section 4.2:
                                                    −1        2
                        dSsb                Ssb dκs
                                      
                                1       b
                                                              X   Dα
                                                                      (yα P b )mf − yα,s Psb
                                                                                             
                             =         ρs +    σ        ρw Gs                  s                                   (D.5)
                         dt    Vp,s         RT dSsb           α=1
                                                                  H α


we can now prove that dSsb /dt ≲ 1 holds, where the symbol a ≲ b means: there exists a constant C such that
a ≤ Cb. To demonstrate, note that Ssb dκs /dSsb ∼ κs ∼ (Ssb )−1/d , which leads to the scaling:
                                                                    −1
                                                          Ssb dκs
                                              
                                        1
                                                  ρbs +      σ            ρw Gs ∼ (Ssb )1/d                        (D.6)
                                       Vp,s               RT dSsb

                                                                37
for the term before the summation in Eq.D.5. For the summation itself, we can write:
     2                                2      2 !1/2 X 2
                                                                                      !1/2
    X   Dα                           X    D α                                       2
            (yα P b )mf − yα,s Psb ≤                       (yα P b )mf − yα,s Psb          ≲ Psb ∼ (Ssb )−1/d
                                                                                 
                     s                                              s
    α=1
        Hα                           α=1
                                          Hα           α=1
                                                                                                          (D.7)
The first inequality follows from Cauchy-Schwarz. The second is the result of applying |a−b| ≤ |a+b| ≤ |a|+|b|
for a, b ≥ 0 to |(yα P b )mf
                          s  − yα,s Psb | followed by using yα,s ∼ yαmf ∼ 1 and the fact that Psb,mf is bounded by
Psb . The latter is because Psb dominates Psb,mf in the limit Ssb → 0. Hence, the summation in Eq.D.5 can be
bounded from above by a term that scales like (Ssb )−1/d . Together with Eq.D.6, this proves dSsb /dt ≲ 1.
   Given dSsb /dt ≲ 1 and nα,s ∼ (Ssb )1−1/d from the above analysis, we can write:

                                              dSsb
                                     nα,s                 ≲ (Ssb )1−1/d = ϵ1−1/d → 0                        (D.8)
                                               dt    ∞

The RHS follows from the fact that the norm is taken over Γϵ (S b = ϵ) and ϵ → 0. We have thus proven:
                                         Z
                                             nα,s gs u · ν dΓ = 0                                    (D.9)
                                                     ∂Ω

through Eq.D.3, which in turn proves Theorem 1 due to Eq.D.2.


Appendix E. Proof of Corollary 1

   A consequence of Theorem 1 is:
                               Z                                 Z
                                         nα,s g(s; t) ds =            nα,s g(s; 0) ds = Cα                  (E.1)
                                     Ω                           Ω

where Cα is a constant that depends on α but not time t. Summing Eq.E.1 over α ∈ {1, 2} yields:
                                  Z                  Z
                                     ns g(s; t) ds =   ns g(s; 0) ds = C                                    (E.2)
                                         Ω                           Ω

where
                                                                 2
                                                                 X
                                                          ns =           nα,s                               (E.3)
                                                                 α=1
and C is a constant independent of α and t.
   Substituting Eqs.E.1-E.2 into the definition of yαmix in Eq.36 and noting nα,s = yα,s ns , we get:
                                    Z                     Z
                            yαmix = yα,s ns g(s; t) ds / ns g(s; t) ds = Cα /C                              (E.4)
                                          s                               s

implying yαmix remains constant for all t. This prove the first assertion in Corollary 1.
   To prove the second, notice at t → ∞ when the bubble population has reached equilibrium, all bubble
compositions and curvatures must be identical. Namely, y1,s = y1mf and y1,s Psb = (y1 P b )mf
                                                                                           s  (thus κs = κmf
                                                                                                          s )

must hold for all s. Otherwise, phase velocities dSsb /dt and/or dy1,s /dt computed from Eq.18 would be non-
zero at some s, contradicting the fact that the population has reached steady-state equilibrium. Denoting
these equilibrium properties by y1∞ and (y1 P b )∞ , it then follows:

                   lim y1,s = lim y1mf = y1∞ ,               lim y1,s Psb = lim (y1 P b )mf
                                                                                         s  = (y1 P b )∞    (E.5)
                   t→∞         t→∞                          t→∞                 t→∞


                                                                 38
Using these relations, we now take the limit of Eq.35 at t → ∞, which yields γ → 1. Similarly, taking the limit
of y1mix in Eq.36, we obtain y1mix → y1∞ . However, since we established that y1mix remains constant for all t,
then y1mix = y1∞ must hold. Using γ → 1 and y1mf → y1mix in taking the limit of Eq.33 proves y1mf,∗ → y1mix .


References

 [1] A. G. Hanson, B. Kutchko, G. Lackey, D. Gulliver, B. R. Strazisar, K. A. Tinker, F. Haeri, R. Wright,
    N. Huerta, S. Baek, et al., Subsurface hydrogen and natural gas storage: State of knowledge and research
    recommendations report (2022).

 [2] S. Bachu, Co2 storage in geological media: Role, means, status and barriers to deployment, Progress in
    energy and combustion science 34 (2) (2008) 254–273.

 [3] P. T. Imhoff, G. P. Thyrum, C. T. Miller, Dissolution fingering during the solubilization of nonaqueous
    phase liquids in saturated porous media: 2. experimental observations, Water Resources Research 32 (7)
    (1996) 1929–1942.

 [4] Z. Lu, M. M. Daino, C. Rath, S. G. Kandlikar, Water management studies in pem fuel cells, part
    iii: Dynamic breakthrough and intermittent drainage characteristics from gdls with and without mpls,
    International Journal of Hydrogen Energy 35 (9) (2010) 4222–4233.

 [5] J. K. Lee, C. Lee, K. F. Fahy, P. J. Kim, K. Krause, J. M. LaManna, E. Baltic, D. L. Jacobson,
    D. S. Hussey, A. Bazylak, Accelerating bubble detachment in porous transport layers with patterned
    through-pores, ACS Applied Energy Materials 3 (10) (2020) 9676–9684.

 [6] J. Holocher, F. Peeters, W. Aeschbach-Hertig, W. Kinzelbach, R. Kipfer, Kinetic model of gas bubble
    dissolution in groundwater and its implications for the dissolved gas composition, Environmental Science
    & Technology 37 (7) (2003) 1337–1343.

 [7] C. Garing, J. A. de Chalendar, M. Voltolini, J. B. Ajo-Franklin, S. M. Benson, Pore-scale capillary
    pressure analysis using multi-scale x-ray micromotography, Advances in Water Resources 104 (2017)
    223–241.

 [8] W. Ostwald, Studien über die bildung und umwandlung fester körper, Zeitschrift für physikalische
    Chemie 22 (1) (1897) 289–330.

 [9] I. M. Lifshitz, V. V. Slyozov, The kinetics of precipitation from supersaturated solid solutions, Journal
    of physics and chemistry of solids 19 (1-2) (1961) 35–50.

[10] C. Wanger, Theorie der alterung von niederschlagen durch umlosen, Z. Elektrochem. 65 (1961) 581–591.

[11] P. W. Voorhees, The theory of ostwald ripening, Journal of Statistical Physics 38 (1985) 231–252.



                                                      39
[12] P. W. Voorhees, Ostwald ripening of two-phase mixtures, Annual Reviews Material Science 22 (1992)
    197–215.
    URL www.annualreviews.org

[13] A. J. Bray, Theory of phase-ordering kinetics, Advances in Physics 51 (2) (2002) 481–587.

[14] J. Morral, G. Purdy, Particle coarsening in binary and multicomponent alloys, Scripta Metallurgica et
    Materialia;(United States) 30 (7) (1994).

[15] S. Kukushkin, V. Slyozov, Theory of the ostwald ripening in multicomponent systems under non-
    isothermal conditions, Journal of Physics and Chemistry of Solids 57 (2) (1996) 195–204.

[16] T. Philippe, P. W. Voorhees, Ostwald ripening in multicomponent alloys, Acta Materialia 61 (11) (2013)
    4237–4244.

[17] K. Kim, P. W. Voorhees, Ostwald ripening of spheroidal particles in multicomponent alloys, Acta Ma-
    terialia 152 (2018) 327–337.

[18] K. Xu, R. Bonnecaze, M. Balhoff, Egalitarianism among bubbles in porous media: an ostwald ripening
    derived anticoarsening phenomenon, Physical review letters 119 (26) (2017) 264502.

[19] J. A. de Chalendar, C. Garing, S. M. Benson, Pore-scale modelling of ostwald ripening, Journal of Fluid
    Mechanics 835 (2018) 363–392.

[20] Y. Mehmani, K. Xu, Pore-network modeling of ostwald ripening in porous media: How do trapped bub-
    bles equilibrate?, Journal of Computational Physics 457 (5 2022). doi:10.1016/j.jcp.2022.111041.

[21] Y. Mehmani, K. Xu, Capillary equilibration of trapped ganglia in porous media: A pore-network mod-
    eling approach, Advances in Water Resources 166 (8 2022). doi:10.1016/j.advwatres.2022.104223.

[22] N. Joewondo, V. Garbin, R. Pini, Nonuniform collective dissolution of bubbles in regular pore networks,
    Transport in Porous Media 141 (3) (2022) 649–666.

[23] D. Singh, H. A. Friis, E. Jettestuen, J. O. Helland, Ostwald ripening of gas bubbles in porous media:
    Impact of pore geometry and spatial bubble distribution, Advances in Water Resources 187 (2024)
    104688.

[24] D. Singh, H. A. Friis, E. Jettestuen, J. O. Helland, Pore-scale ostwald ripening of gas bubbles in the
    presence of oil and water in porous media, Journal of Colloid and Interface Science 647 (2023) 331–343.

[25] N. Joewondo, V. Garbin, R. Pini, Experimental evidence of the effect of solute concentration on the
    collective evolution of bubbles in a regular pore-network, Chemical Engineering Research and Design
    192 (2023) 82–90.



                                                    40
[26] M. Salehpour, T. Lan, N. Bueno, M. Z. I. Laku, Y. Mehmani, B. Zhao, Ostwald ripening in underground
    gas storage, arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.00044 (2025).

[27] Y. Zhang, B. Bijeljic, Y. Gao, S. Goodarzi, S. Foroughi, M. J. Blunt, Pore-scale observations of hydrogen
    trapping and migration in porous rock: Demonstrating the effect of ostwald ripening, Geophysical
    Research Letters 50 (7) (2023) e2022GL102383.

[28] R. Song, D. Feng, G. Hui, J. Liu, C. Yang, Visualized experiments on the hydrogen transports and
    bubble ripening mechanism in porous reservoir of underground hydrogen storage, International Journal
    of Hydrogen Energy 105 (2025) 326–344.

[29] M. Boon, T. Rademaker, C. W. Winardhi, H. Hajibeygi, Multiscale experimental study of h/brine
    multiphase flow in porous rock characterizing relative permeability hysteresis, hydrogen dissolution, and
    ostwald ripening, Scientific Reports 14 (1) (2024) 30170.

[30] Y. Li, C. Garing, S. M. Benson, A continuum-scale representation of ostwald ripening in heterogeneous
    porous media, Journal of Fluid Mechanics 889 (2020) A14.

[31] Y. Mehmani, K. Xu, A continuum theory of diffusive bubble depletion in porous media, Advances in
    Water Resources 185 (2024) 104625.

[32] K. Xu, Y. Mehmani, L. Shang, Q. Xiong, Gravity-induced bubble ripening in porous media and its
    impact on capillary trapping stability, Geophysical Research Letters 46 (23) (2019) 13804–13813.

[33] Y. Feng, C. Wang, X. Jin, K. Xu, Comprehensive darcy-scale analysis of ripening in porous media,
    Transport in Porous Media 144 (1) (2022) 301–316.

[34] M. J. Blunt, Ostwald ripening and gravitational equilibrium: Implications for long-term subsurface gas
    storage, Physical Review E 106 (4) (2022) 045103.

[35] Y. Li, F. M. Orr Jr, S. M. Benson, Long-term redistribution of residual gas due to non-convective
    transport in the aqueous phase, Transport in Porous Media 141 (1) (2022) 231–253.

[36] Y. Yu, C. Wang, J. Liu, S. Mao, Y. Mehmani, K. Xu, Bubble coarsening kinetics in porous media,
    Geophysical Research Letters 50 (1) (2023) e2022GL100757.

[37] N. Bueno, L. Ayala, Y. Mehmani, A generalized kinetic theory of ostwald ripening in porous media,
    Advances in Water Resources 193 (2024). doi:10.1016/j.advwatres.2023.104826.

[38] N. Bueno, L. Ayala, Y. Mehmani, Ostwald ripening of multi-component bubbles in porous media: A
    theory and a pore-scale model of how bubble populations equilibrate, Advances in Water Resources 182
    (2023). doi:10.1016/j.advwatres.2023.104581.




                                                     41
[39] J. Kozeny, Ueber kapillare leitung des wassers im boden, Sitzungsberichte der Akademie der Wis-
    senschaften in Wien 136 (1927) 271.

[40] P. C. Carman, Fluid flow through granular beds, Trans. Inst. Chem. Eng. London 15 (1937) 150–156.




                                                  42
